
Many years have gone by since I first had an experience of immaterial- 
ity. But despite the passing of time, the impression I derived from it was so 
vivid and powerful that it still lingers in my memory, as far as it is pos- 
sible to transfuse and retain certain transcendent experiences there. I will 
attempt now to convey this impression humanis verbis (in human terms) , 
evoking it again from the innermost recesses of my consciousness. 

The sensation of immaterial reality suddenly flashed in my conscious- 
ness, without prior warning, apparent cause, or determining reason. One 
day about fourteen years ago I was standing on a sidewalk of the Strozzi 
Palace in Florence, talking with a friend. I do not remember what we were 
talking about, though it was probably about some esoteric topic: in any 
event, the topic of the conversation had no bearing on the experience I 
had. It was a day like many others, and 1 was in perfect physical and spiri- 
tual health. I was not tired, excited, or intoxicated, but free from worries 
and nagging thoughts. All of a sudden, as I was either talking or listening, 
I felt the world, all things, and life itself in a different way I suddenly 
became aware of my incorporeity and of the radical, evident immateriality 
of the universe, I realized that my body was in me, and that all things were 



9 
SUB SPECIE INTERIORITATIS 

inwardly within me; that everything led to me, namely to the deep, abys- 
mal, and obscure center of my being. It was a sudden transfiguration; the 
sense of immaterial reality stirring in my field of awareness, and connect- 
ing with the usual sense of everyday "dense" reality, allowed me to see ev- 
erything in a new and different light. It was as when a sudden opening in a 
thick ceiling of clouds lets a ray of sun filter through, and the ground or the 
sea below is suddenly transfigured in a light and ephemeral brightness. 

I perceived myself as a dimensionless and ineffably abstract point; 1 
felt that inside this point the whole was contained, in an entirely nonspatial 
manner. It was a total reversal of the ordinary human sensation. Not only 
did the Self no longer have the impression of being contained, or localized 
in the body; not only did it acquire the perception of the incorporeity of its 
own body but it felt the body within itself, feeling everything sub specie 
interioritatis (from the inner point of view). It is necessary to understand 
the terms I am using here: "within," "inner," "interior" are meant in a non- 
geometrical sense, simply as the best terms to convey the sense of the 
reversal of the position or relationship existing between body and con- 
sciousness. But then again, to speak of consciousness contained in the 
body is just as absurd and improper as to speak of the body contained in 
consciousness, considering the heterogeneity of the two terms, 

It was a powerful, sweeping, overwhelming, positive, and original im- 
pression. It emerged spontaneously, without transition or warning, like a 
thief in the night, sneaking in and grafting itself on the usual commonplace 
way of perceiving reality. It surfaced very quickly, asserting itself and then 
remaining in a clear fashion, thus allowing me to live it intensely and to be- 
sure of it; then it vanished, leaving me dumbfounded. "What I heard was a 
note of the eternal poem, 1 ' wrote Dante; and in evoking it again, I still feel 
its sacred solemnity its calm and silent power, and its stellar purity float- 
ing in my inmost awareness. 




This was my first experience of immateriality 

1 have tried to describe my impression as accurately as possible, even at 
the cost of being criticized for not having obeyed the norms of a precise 
philosophical terminology I will readily admit that my philosophical 



10 
SUB SPECIE INJERIORITATIS 

competence was not, and still is not, equal to these spiritual experiences, 
and also that, from the point of view of philosophical studies, it would 
probably be better if only those who have great philosophical merits could 
be told of such experiences. Nevertheless, it must be acknowledged that 
the point of view of philosophical studies is not the only admissible one, 
and that "the spirit bloweth where it listeth'* (John 3:7) without regard for 
anyone's philosophical competence. 

In the specific case of my personal experience, the shift occurred inde- 
pendently from any scientific or philosophical speculation and from any 
cerebral activity 1 am rather inclined to think that this independence was 
not fortuitous and exceptional. In truth, it seems that rational speculation 
may lead no further than a mere conceptual abstraction of a fairly negative 
character, and is thus incapable of suggesting or provoking the direct expe- 
rience or the perception of immateriality. 

The usual way of living is based on the sense of material reality or, if 
one prefers, on the material sense of reality. What exists is what resists, the 
compact, massive, and impenetrable; things are insofar as they exist and 
occupy space, outside and even inside our bodies; it is as though the more 
impenetrable and impregnable they are, the more real they are. The em- 
pirical and ordinary concept of matter, as a res (thing) in itself occupying 
space, tangible and offering resistance, is a function of bodily life. The 
necessities of a life lived in a solid, dense, heavy body, accustomed to rest 
on solid and stable ground, generate the habit of identifying the sense of 
reality with this particular human way of perceiving reality, and generate 
the conviction a priori that this is indeed the only possible way and that 
there neither are nor can be others. 

However, these typical traits of material reality become, increasingly 
tenuous and eventually disappear when a shift occurs from solid matter to 
liquid, fluid, and gaseous matter. Thus scientific analysis leads, through 
the successive stages of molecular and atomic disintegration, to a view of 
matter that is very far from the primitive, empirical concept that first ap- 
peared to be a most certain and immediate datum of experience. Moving 
from science to philosophy, the universal dematerialization of physical 
bodies necessarily corresponds to the idealistic conceptual abstraction and 
to the resolution of the whole in the Self. However, the conceptual ac- 
knowledgment of universal spirituality does not lead to the conquest or to 



11 

SUB SPECIE 1NTERI0RTTAT1S 

the effective acquisition of the perception of spiritual reality It is possible 
to follow an idealistic philosophy while remaining as spiritually blind as 
the grossest materialist. It is possible to claim to be an idealist philosopher 
and to believe oneself to have reached the peak of idealism merely through 
a laborious conceptual conquest, all the while excluding or not thinking at 
all about the possibility of a perception ex imo (from below). Again, it is 
possible to mistake every spiritual epiphany with a mere act of thought — 
and even to believe it necessary to do so. 

Naturally, with such notions in one's head, one could be clambering up 
the trees of absolute idealism without any other consequence than break- 
ing a few branches on the heads of one's fellow climbers. We really should 
not look so disdainfully at the positivist philosophers of the past, since 
they were the poor but honest victims of a simplistic acceptance of the 
empirical criterion of material reality! To deprive this materialistic and 
empirical sense of reality of its character of uniqueness, positivity and 
irreplaceability does not rob it of all value, but rather defines its value. It 
continues to have a right of citizenship in the universe, beside and to- 
gether with other ways of experiencing reality. 

Having attained idealistic conceptual abstraction is no cause for sing- 
ing hymns of victory too soon. Nor does the existence and the discovery of 
immaterial reality require us to turn the tables, bestowing on the new sense 
of reality the privileges of the old one, exalting the former at the latter's 
expense. The truth of one of them does not imply the falsity of the other: 
the existence of one does not exclude coexistence with the other. It is illu- 
sory and arbitrary to believe that there is and must be only one way to expe- 
rience reality; if in the last analysis the empirical criterion of material reality 
is fatally reduced to a mere illusion, this modality of consciousness based on 
an illusion nevertheless really exists; so much so, that this sense is the foun- 
dation of the lives of countless beings, even when this criterion is conceptu- 
ally or spiritually overcome, engulfed by the new sense of immateriality. 

My experience, no matter how fleeting, gave me the practical demon- 
stration of the possible, effective, and simultaneous coexistence of the two 
perceptions of reality, namely the pure spiritual perception and the ordi- 
nary and bodily perception, as contradictory as they may be to the eyes of 
reason. It is an elementary experience that is certainly no occasion for pride; 
however, it is a fundamental experience similar to the one Arjuna had in 



12 
SUB SPECIE INTEM0R1TATIS 

the Bhagavad Gita and to the one Tat had in Pymander; it is a first, effec- 
tive, and direct perception of what the Kabbalists called the holy palace 
within; of what Philalethes called "the hidden palace of the King"; and of 
what St. Theresa of Avila called "the interior castle" As elementary as it 
maybe, it is an experience that initiates a person to a new and double life; 
the hermetic dragon puts on wings and becomes airborne, able to live on 
the earth or to fly away from it. 

Why is it, though, that we are usually deaf to this perception and that I 
myself was not aware of it before? Why did it fade away? What purpose 
does it serve? Is it not better not even to suspect the existence of such 
disturbing mysteries? And why is one not taught how to obtain this sensa- 
tion? Is it right that only a few should partake of it, and others not? 

It is not easy to give exhaustive answers to these and other relevant 
questions. As for spiritual deafness, it seems to me that it comes from or 
depends on the fact that usually our conscious attention is so much fo- 
cused on the sense of material reality that every other sensation goes un- 
noticed. Thus it is a matter of listening: the melodic theme played by the 
violins usually commands all one's attention, while that of the cellos and 
basses goes unnoticed. Maybe it is also the monotony of this deep and low 
note that hides it from ordinary perception. I clearly remember the aston- 
ishing feeling I experienced one day in the mountains, when, standing in 
the middle of a vast field of flowers, all of a sudden the dull and monoto- 
nous buzzing sound produced by countless insects struck my ear. Only by 
chance, or rather all at once and without apparent reason, I became aware 
of the buzzing that certainly existed prior to my sudden perception. 

The answer, as one can see, can be found only in a comparison with 
similar phenomena, and it will probably not satisfy the reader. Thus I am 
afraid that 1 will not be able to give more satisfactory answers to other 
questions. Therefore I shall end this essay, in obedience to the limits of 
time if not to discretion. 



Leo 

Barriers 



T t 



he first initiative of a man seeking the Way must be to reject the ha- 
bitual image that he has of himself. He will be able to begin to say "I" only 
when the magical word corresponds to the inner imagination of self-aware- 
ness unconstrained by limitations of space, time, or power. 

Human beings must retrieve the sense of the reality of themselves. At 
present, they only limit and diminish themselves, feeling different and 
smaller than they really are; every thought they conceive and every deed 
they perform adds one more bar to their prison cell, one more veil to their 
vision, one more denial of their power. They lock themselves inside the 
limits of their bodies and attach themselves to the earth that carries them; 
it is as if an eagle fancied to be a snake and crawled on the ground, ignor- 
ing its wings. 

It is not only that man ignores, deforms, and denies himself, but that he 
also reenacts the myth of Medusa, turning everything around him into 
stone, He observes and sizes nature with weights and measures. He limits 
the life surrounding him to petty laws, and overcomes the mysteries with 
petty hypotheses. He freezes the universe into a static unity, and puts him- 
self at the periphery of the wo rid , shyly, humbly, as if he were an accidental 
secretion, without power or hope. 




Man is the center of the universe. All of the cold or incandescent material 
masses of the myriad worlds out there do not weigh on the scale of values 
as much as the simplest change in his consciousness. The limits of his body 
are just an illusion; man does not merely rest on the earth, but he continues 
through the earth and into cosmic space. Whether he moves his thought 
or his arms, an entire world moves with him; thousands of mysterious 
forces hasten toward him in a creative gesture, and all of his daily actions 
are just the caricature of what really flows divinely toward him. 



14 
BARRIERS 

Thus he should look around himself and free everything that surrounds 
him from its petrification. Before knowing it, he must imagine that there 
are conscious energies in the earth, in the waters, in the air, and in fire, and 
that the so-called natural forces are just modalities of our own substance 
projected outward. It is not the earth that makes the plant live, but the 
forces in the plant that draw from the earth the elements necessary for its 
own life. Something else needs to be grafted onto the sense of the beauty of 
things, namely the sense of the mystery of things as an obscure and yet 
intuited reality Not only must what we can see and know act in us, but the 
unknown must also be bravely affirmed and felt in all its power. 




We must emphasize the need for a special attitude to this point of view, as 
to any other esoteric one. What matters is to inaugurate something that 
will often help along the way of spiritual development, namely a way of 
possessing a concept that amounts to more than merely understanding or 
remembering it. It is necessary to establish a rhythm: in other words, to 
present a concept periodically and rhythmically 1 to one's consciousness, 
which then grasps it willingly, and not only as a thought but also as a 
feeling. The contemplation of one's being and of the world in the manner 
that I have described generates a sense of greatness and power. We must 
retain this sense within us, in order to be intensely penetrated by it. 

In this way we will be able to establish a relationship of realization with 
this new vision , which at first will flow into the subconscious, then after 
some time will be incorporated increasingly into the feeling, in the man- 
ner I have described. A new condition will then arise: what was first a 
mere concept will eventually become the presence of a force, and a state of 
liberation will be reached, on which the new life may be built. 

All the exercises of inner development will be paralyzed unless one breaks 
the shell of limitation that daily life forms around one, and that still remains 
in the human subconscious even after a change of perspectives. 



LThis fundamental point, namely to introduce knowledge into ones body by means of a 
certain rhythm until it is totally transfused, may explain why there are so many conceptu- 
ally useless repetitions in Buddha's sermons, as also in magical prayers and invocations, 
and in the rational employment of breathing techniques in Hatha Yoga. (Note by UR) 



Abraxas 

Knowledge of the Wafers 



T h 



he life of all beings, without exception, is ruled by a primordial Force 
deep inside them. The nature of this force is craving: an appetite that is 
never satisfied, an endless restlessness, an irresistible need, and a blind, 
wild yearning. 

The essence of this primordial cosmic nature is: becoming; chaotic and 
disorderly transformation; an incoercible flux; generation-destruction; 
attraction-repulsion; terror-desire; formation-dissolution. All of these ele- 
ments are combined in a fiery mixture that knows no rest. 

The Wise spoke of it as a wonder and as a terror. They called it: Univer- 
sal and Living Fire, l \>kr\ (matter), Green Dragon, Quintessence, First Sub- 
stance, Great Magical Agent. The principle of the universal work is also 
the principle of their "Great Work," since the Magistery of Creation and 
the Magistery with which man realizes himself according to the royal Art 
are one and the same. 

This Matter of ours is neither an abstraction of profane philosophy nor 
a myth or a fairy tale, but a living and powerful reality, the spirit and the 
vitality of the Earth and of Life. 

The human race does not know it. A providential natural law keeps it 
hidden from their consciousness through the illusory spectacle of material 
phenomena, of solid reality without which there would be no rest or peace 
in their lives. According to the same providential law, this veil of ignorance 
is removed and the eye of Knowledge is opened only at a certain point of 
growth and in the presence of a strength able to endure the vision. 

Know, therefore, that the Life of your life is in It. 
Look out for It. 

It reveals itself, for example, at all times of sudden danger. 
It may be a speeding car rushing toward you, when you walk absent- 
mindedly; or the opening of a yawning crevice in the earth under your 



16 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE WATERS 

feet; a flameless burning coal, or an electrified object that you have touched 
inadvertently Then in reaction, something violent and extremely fast hap- 
pens. Is it your "will," your "consciousness," your "SelP? No. Your will, 
consciousness, and Self usually come into play only later on. At the time 
they were absent and left behind. Something deeper, faster, more absolute 
than everything that you are has suddenly manifested, taken charge, and 
asserted itself. 

When you experience hunger, terror, sensual thirst, panic, and spasm — 
there you will encounter this thing again, as something violent, dark, and 
untamed. And if such intimations allow you to feel it, you will gradually be 
able to experience it as the invisible background of your whole waking life. 

The deep roots of inclinations, faiths, atavisms, invincible and irratio- 
nal convictions; habits, character, everything that lives in you as animal 
instinct or as biological legacy; all the body's will; the blind thirst for life, 
yearning to generate, to preserve, and to continue itself — all this recon- 
nects and merges into the same principle. In relation to it, you usually 
have the same freedom of a chained dog: you may not feel the chain, and 
think you are free until you try to go beyond a certain limit. But when you 
do that, the chain tautens and stops you. Otherwise, it deceives you: you 
move in a circle, without realizing it. 

Do not deceive yourself: even the "highest things" obey this "god." 
Watch out: the more they appear independent and freed, the more inti- 
mately and strictly they obey it, obedient to its intoxicating magic. As long 
as its deepest yearning is affirmed, this force does not care for this form or 
that, or for the various "reasons" with which you believe you can justify 
yourself. Being disguised, it reasserts its bond over you. Look out for this 
force too, and come to know it through the wild power of imagination and 
suggestion. Again, it is a speed that freezes and chains you; when it asserts 
itself, you can do nothing. The more you "want" to oppose it, the more 
you will feed it at your expense. 

It is like fear: the more you try to drive it out, the stronger it grows. It is 
like the sleep that evades you the harder you "try 51 to fall asleep. It is like a 
plank over the abyss: it is the suggestion of falling, and you will certainly 
fall if you force yourself to cross, "willing" to overcome it. 

It is like the flame of passion that rises sharper, the more your "con- 



17 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE WATERS 

science" tries to stifle it; it disappears only by entering inside and utterly 
poisoning you. 

Here again, it is this force that erupts. Be aware that this Being that 
merges with the emotional and irrational powers travels deeper within 
you, until it identifies itself with the same force in charge of the deep func- 
tions of the physical life. What can "will," "thought," "Self" do against 
these functions? They are external to it: like parasites, they live off it, draw- 
ing essential fluids from it, though they are unable to descend all the way 
to its deep trunk. 

Dig, without fear, with a sharp tool. Ask yourself: "What elements of 
my body can 1 justify with my will? Do 1 will my own breathing, or the 
inner combustion through which food is digested? Do I w T ant my own 
form, my own flesh, this particular man, who lives in this fashion, happy 
or unhappy, noble or vulgar?" But since I ask these questions, should 1 not 
press further on? Do I really will "my" will, "my" conscience, "my" Self, or 
are they just there? That which 1 claim is caused by my wall, 1 should also be 
able not to will it, and thus 1 should be able to live without it. As far as "my" 
empirical Self is concerned, do 1 own it or does it own me? 

Reader, since you have approached the "Science of the Magi," you must 
be strong enough for this truth: you are not the life in you. You do not exist. 
There is nothing you can call "mine." You do not own Life: it is Life that 
owns you. You endure it. It is a pure illusion to believe that this phantasm 
of a "Self is able to live forever, following the decay of the body Can't you 
see that the relation with this body is essential to your "Self," and that any 
illness, trauma, or accident has a precise influence on all of its faculties, no 
matter how "spiritual" and "superior" they may be? 

And now, detach yourself from your own self and cross the threshold, 
as you feel the rhythmic sensation of analogy, deeper and deeper into the 
dark recesses of the force that sustains your body 

Here it loses name and individuation. The sensation of this force will 
expand to encompass the notions of "me" and "not-me," pervading all of 
nature, substantiating time, carrying myriads of beings along as if they 
were drunk or hypnotized, reaffirming itself in a thousand forms, irresist- 
ible, wild, limitless, burning with an eternal insufficiency and privation. 

Think to yourself: "This is." If this knowledge leads you back to your- 
self, and, as you experience a sense of deadly cold, you feel an abyss yawning 



18 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE WATERS 

beneath you: <4 I exist in this" — then you have achieved the knowledge of 
the "Waters." 2 

In our Tradition, these "waters," or Humidum Radicate ("radical Humid- 
ity"), have been symbolized as V (downward direction, precipitation). They 
have also been referred to as the "earthly Venus," as female and cosmic ma- 
trix (V in Hinduism is the symbol of Shakti and of the yoni), or as "Original 
Snake" (because of the serpentine path «?, which is the astrological equiva- 
lent of V). It is the elementary demiurgic power, God's "Magic," the primor- 
dial substance that was precipitated when God said "Let there be Light'" 

Later on you will learn to recognize it as Light: an elementary light that 
carries the "Signatures" of all things like whirlwind-natures. It is undiffer- 
entiated, being idea, substance, and motion, both physical and psychic; it 
is indifferent toward good and evil and to every form, in its plastic capacity 
to be transformed into all things. It is a blind yearning; in it, idea and 
reality are instantaneously and "magically" one and the same, just as in 
that reflection of it, that "path" leading to it, which is the power of imagi- 
nation in man. 

Since everything is at the mercy of this force and exists through this 
force, know that he who learns to master it completely will be able to 
dominate through all of nature; fire, earth, air, and water, life and death, 
the powers of heaven and hell, because this force encompasses them all. 

And now, since you wished to learn about it, realize that the "Science of 
the Magi" wills this and disdains anything that is not this. 

To create something stable, impassive, immortal, something rescued 
from the "Waters" that is now living and breathing outside of them, finally 
free; and then, like a strong man who grasps a raging bull by the horns, 
slowly but relentlessly subjugating it, to dominate this cosmic nature in 
oneself — this is the secret of our Art, the Art of the Sun and of Power, of 



2. In Buddhism, this "knowledge of the Waters" corresponds to the realization of so- 
called "samsaric consciousness" and of the truth of anattd (no-soul). Beyond the 
awareness of the unique life of a given individual, there is the awareness of the trunk, of 
which this life is only a branch: the primordial force of this trunk is experienced. 
Moreover, what is also experienced is the unreality of the "Self and of everything that 
resembles the "Self (this is the doctrine of anattcL). To feel sams&ra and to feel oneself in 
samstira is the presupposition, also in Buddhism, for the realization of that which is truly 
spiritual and transcendent, (Note by UR) 



18 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE WATERS 

beneath you: "I exist in this" — then you have achieved the knowledge of 

the "Waters." 2 

In our Tradition, these "waters/ 1 or Humidum Radicale ("radical Humid- 
ity"), have been symbolized as V (downward direction, precipitation). They 
have also been referred to as the "earthly Venus/' as female and cosmic ma- 
trix (V in Hinduism is the symbol of Shakti and of the yoni), or as "Original 
Snake" (because of the serpentine path «?, which is the astrological equiva- 
lent of V), It is the elementary demiurgic power, God's "Magic," the primor- 
dial substance that was precipitated when God said "Let there be Light!" 

Later on you will learn to recognize it as Light: an elementary light that 
carries the "Signatures" of all things like whirlwind-natures. It is undiffer- 
entiated, being idea, substance, and motion, both physical and psychic; it 
is indifferent toward good and evil and to every form, in its plastic capacity 
to be transformed into all things. It is a blind yearning; in it, idea and 
reality are instantaneously and "magically" one and the same, just as in 
that reflection of it, that "path" leading to it, which is the power of imagi- 
nation in man. 

Since everything is at the mercy of this force and exists through this 
force, know that he who learns to master it completely will be able to 
dominate through all of nature; fire, earth, air, and water, life and death, 
the powers of heaven and hell, because this force encompasses them all 

And now, since you wished to learn about it, realize that the "Science of 
the Magi" wills this and disdains anything that is not this. 

To create something stable, impassive, immortal, something rescued 
from the "Waters" that is now living and breathing outside of them, finally 
free; and then, like a strong man who grasps a raging bull by the horns, 
slowly but relentlessly subjugating it, to dominate this cosmic nature in 
oneself — this is the secret of our Art, the Art of the Sun and of Power, of 



2. In Buddhism, this "knowledge of the Waters" corresponds to the realization of so- 
called "samsaric consciousness" and of the truth of anattd (no-soul). Beyond the 
awareness of the unique life of a given individual, there is the awareness of the trunk, of 
which this life is only a branch: the primordial force of this trunk is experienced. 
Moreover, what is also experienced is the unreality of the "Self* and of everything that 
resembles the "SelP (this is the doctrine of anattd). To feel samsftra and to feel oneself in 
samsdra is the presupposition, also in Buddhism, for the realization of that which is truly 
spiritual and transcendent. (Note by UR) 



19 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE WATERS 

the "Mighty Strength of all Strengths." The high sciences of the Kabbalah 
and Magic promise an immortal nature and a regal power to man: thus, 
they must be regarded as vain and deceitful if they do not deliver (E. Levi), 

Stop your petty mind: if you think that this is folly or the proud dream 
originating from a shallow pride, be assured that it is fear thinking in you. 
You do not need to believe: on the contrary, you must not believe. Try Dare. 

The "Matter of the Great Work" is here, inside your craving, in your 
deepest will, closer to you than you are to yourself. Arouse it, excite it. 
Resist it. Then, you will experience in yourself its wild power, in propor- 
tion to how far you can go beyond your daring. And if you can conceive an 
even greater strength, what can you still conceive that can resist it or would 
not be bent or broken by it? 

You have now known the possibility of the Work, whether or not you 
are equal to to it. 

Look. 

This shore is the one plagued by misery, darkness, and pollution. Be- 
fore you is the mighty current. There lies the other shore. 

On this side are ignorant people, lacking Knowledge, pale, passive, in- 
toxicated, whose lives are still outside and on this side of the Waters. On 
the other shore you will find virile men, heroic souls, awakened to disgust, 
to revolt, to the Great Awakening; having left one shore behind, they dare 
face the current and the undertow, being led by their ever more firm, un- 
shakable will. Once there, they are known as "Survivors of the Waters," 
"Walkers on the Waters," the "Holy Race of the Free," "The Conquerors, 1 ' 
'The Lords of Life and Salvation," "The Radiant Ones." They are the 
"Dragon Slayers," the "Dominators of the Bull," "Consecrated to the Sun," 
those who have been transformed through Amnion's power and Wisdom. 

These people can bind and freeze the Waters, Having been conquered 
by them, the Waters are now a magical force that obeys them. The Sun 
rises over the Waters and controls them with its reflection. Desire, the 
unleashed centerless lunar force (O = Moon, the symbol at Materia piima 
or of Humidum Radicale, the radical Humidity) finds here a center (0 = 
symbol of the Sun). 

The positive ascendance (A, symbol of UR, the initiatic Fire) that has 
asserted itself over the humid womb of the descendent V balances it. This 



20 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE WATERS 

conjunction is known as the symbol of Conquerors — Solomon's seal, which 
consists of two combined triangles % 

If you want to approach our Art, be aware that this is a painful struggle 
and somewhat like walking on a razor's edge. You may win or lose, and 
two things lead to certain disaster: to be afraid and to interrupt the opera- 
tion. Once you have begun, you must go all the way, since an interruption 
leads to a dreadful reaction, with the opposite result. You can easily under- 
stand why: at every step you take, an increasingly higher quantity of 
swirling energy is arrested and pushed upstream; having been excited and 
provoked, it is filled with tension. As soon as you give up, it will come 
crashing down upon you and sweep you away 

Prepare yourself. 

Fix your eyes on the goal and never lose sight of it. 

Close your eyes. Create an image and look at it. In the dark, learn to 
discern a light that cannot be seen with physical eyes. This ethereal light 
carries the first secret of the Work, 

Become insensitive to good and evil, upright, absolute, naked. 

Learn to will without yearning, without fear or regrets. 

Create a power to act without tiring. Let this power be cold, hard, and at 
the same time labile and flexible. The Secret of the Force consists in will- 
ing well, willing long, willing without ceasing — and in never yearning. 

Cut yourself free from the bonds of sensuality, intoxication, and pas- 
sion: reduce yourself to a simplicity that wills. 

Violate every need. Use everything and abstain from everything as you 
please. Become the absolute ruler of your soul 

Create a resistance. What is mobile obeys what is immobile, and the 
powers of nature become subjected to him who can resist them. Having 
reached a point when you desire nothing and fear nothing, there will be 
few things over which you will not rule. However, enjoy nothing until you 
have first vanquished it within yourself. 

The Force does not give itself up. Take it. Dare. 

Being free, well balanced, strong, calm, and pure, and having slain de- 
sire, say: "I want. 1 ' 

This is the first teaching. The door has been opened to you. The Force 

IS IN YOU. 



Luce 

Opus Magicum 

Concentration and Silence 



T> 



he possibility of achieving a complete theurgical and magical realiza- 
tion is based on the operator's direct and empirical knowledge of the spiri- 
tual powers that constitute the intimate essence of reality; this knowledge 
is attained by performing a ritual that helps to awaken one's faculties, 
whether unknown or neglected. 

He who, after choosing a path to follow, steels himself and is certain 
that his will shall endure, when facing the many obstacles on the way, and 
when no moment of weakness shall deter him from his appointed path, he 
is fit to begin the ritual. 

In order to further clarify what is said about sacred operations, I will sup- 
ply some brief references from magical and hermetic texts that may reveal 
many meanings, thus explaining the exact way in which the ritual opera- 
tions should be performed. 

We should first say something about the essence of human nature, which 
must be correctly understood in the multiple variety of its external and 
apparent symbols and its verbal explanations. 

Agrippa wrote: "There are four elements that constitute the grounds of 
all material things, Fire, Earth, Water, Air, of which all earthly things are 
compounded; not by fusion but by transmutation and reunion, and in which 
all things are resolved when they decay" 3 These elements foreshadow in 
the physical and apparent reality the particular experiences of the operat- 
ing spirit, whether it is conscious or not; "for none of them is found in the 
pure state, but they are more or less mixed, and apt to be changed one into 
the other." 4 This work of transformation is performed by Fire (i.e., by the 



3. Henry Cornelius Agrippa, De Occulta Philosophic, I 5 3. 

4. Ibid. 



22 
OPUS MAGICUM: CONCENTRATION AND SILENCE 

spirit) that acts on the Earth (i.e., matter) in order to actualize the perfect 
Magistery or the attainment of the Stone of the Wise. 

Let us remember; "Aurum igitur aurificandi verum, unum, solum 
principium esto/ >5 (Gold is the one, true, and only principle of gold-making.) 
The principle of perfectibility, dignification, and sublimation of the spirit 
is in the spirit itself and it creates (or determines, if you prefer) within 
itself the conditions of the ascent. Do not think that this is an easy opera- 
tion, especially in its initial, double phase. This phase teaches how to first 
isolate the spirit, making it unassailable from any external influence, until, 
having perfected this state, it eventually acquires a new self-consciousness 
with completely new ways of perceiving. 

The need for an assiduous and tenacious perseverance has been sym- 
bolized by the alchemists with the expression "Iron of the Wise." This 
resolve is necessary in the operation before the composition of Mercury, 
which will later be made to act upon the metals that symbolize the earthly 
affections. These affections, being gradually sublimated to the ultimate 
perfection of cosmic powers (heavens and planets), from the state of ini- 
tial impurity proper to them (when they are mixed in the earth with sub- 
stances foreign to them), can eventually join the essence of the sovereign 
artifex, and even be identified with it in the perfection of the Work. 




Concentration is the essential and the next most important faculty after 
the willful determination appropriate to the purpose. For those wTio are 
used to studying, it will be easy to concentrate, as they reconstruct the 
psychological process of attention that, in our case, is at first free from any 
object. In this as well as in every other phase, they observe the general 
principle of applying themselves for longer periods of time and with in- 
creasing intensity. 

We should note here that concentration can be practiced in two ways: 
the first, which we may call "external," has a purely cerebral and mental 
character; the second is essentially an act of the spirit. 

One begins by finding a quiet and silent place, trying to eliminate any 
external obstacle to concentration, and assumes the most comfortable and 



5. Eirenaeus Philalethes, Introitus apertus ad ocdusum regis palatium, ch, L 



23 
OPUS MAG1CVM: CONCENTRATION AND SILENCE 

fitting position, so that the body will experience the least discomfort and 
not exercise any muscular effort. Then, totally abandoning yourself, relax 
in a position of absolute rest We recommend the use of an armchair with 
a high back and armrests capable of sustaining the full length of the fore- 
arms. One can even lie down, with the head at the same level as the body 
facing eastward. In the case of several people practicing together, special 
guidelines must be observed. 

The initial theme of concentration is to become free from the habitual 
way of thinking and to feel one's thought as something real, fixed, mate- 
rial, massive, located in the mind, in the brain, as something condensed 
and gathered in its proper seat. Thought should be imagined to acquire 
such a density and consistency as to be grasped, completely dominated, 
and maintained outside the body. In this act, what occurs is a gradual sepa- 
ration between the conscious spirit, which is purely aware of what it is 
doing, and the act itself, which is something performed by the spirit, out- 
side of the spirit, on another plane of "density" endowed with another, 
different nature. The spirit, by concentrating, in the tension of determin- 
ing and feeling thought in such a concrete way, gradually detaches itself 
from it as a conscious act. 

For this purpose many devices can be employed, such as mirrors. 6 It is 
generally helpful to place one's thought at a certain distance away The 
concentration of thought in the area between the eyes is the object of spe- 
cial practices aimed at specific purposes. 

Another method of concentration, more perfect but also more difficult, 
consists in not paying attention to one's thought, abandoning it to itself, until, 
being deprived of the vitality that it derives from attention, it remains inert, 
no longer capable of disturbing the pure act of spiritual consciousness. 

In this state is found Silence. 

The double function, active and passive, of the spirit in this phase was 
aptly described by Philalethes: "Est autem aurum nostrum duplex, quod ad 
opus nostrum expetimus, maturum puta,fixum } Latonemflavum cuius cor sive 



6. The use of mirrors was discussed in issues 8-9 of Ignis (1925) in the context of a 
particular method of realization. We should, however, note that, in expounding ritual 
phases or real experiences, only what is most important was discussed; thus, countless 
details were purposely neglected. 



24 
OPUS MAG1CUM: CONCENTRATION AND SILENCE 

centrum est ignis punts. Quart corpus suum in igne defendit, in quo depur- 
ationem recipit, ut nihil eius tyrannidi cedat 5 out ab eo patitur. Hoc in opere 
nostra vices maris gerit, quare auro nostro albo crudiori, spermati foemineo, 
conjungitur; etc" 1 (Our gold that we use for our work is double, namely a 
ripe, fixed, yellow Latona whose heart or center is pure fire. Hence it de- 
fends its body in the fire, in which it receives its purification, such that it 
surrenders nothing to its tyranny, nor does it suffer from it. This acts the 
part of the male in our work, by which it is joined to our white, cruder 
gold, as to the female seed, etc.) 

The nature of the fire, as animating spirit (and not as a particular element 
to be experienced) was thus described by Agrippa: "Fire appears in all things, 
and through all things, and at the same time is nothing, for it illuminates all, 
yet remains hidden and invisible when it is by itself and unaccompanied by 
matter in which to manifest its proper action and thereby reveal itself. It is 
boundless, and invisible, sufficient in itself for every action that is proper to it 
... it comprehends the other elements while remaining incomprehensible, 
having no need for any of them, able to grow through its own virtue and to 
communicate its greatness to the things that receive it, etc." 8 




In Silence, the spirit, free from every bond, precipitated within itself, sees 
and knows itself. This happens through a succession of conscious percep- 
tions that can be differentiated into three successive phases. 

At first, one has a clear feeling of isolation and solitude, in which the 
spirit floats, just as an inconsistent and airy mass floats inside a light, lu- 
minous medium. Gradually, one has the feeling of being submerged, sink- 
ing, and descending into something that, instead of being more substan- 
tial, becomes increasingly tenuous; at the same time one experiences a 
sense of dilating, as if one's surroundings slowly dilate, expanding to the 
infinite recesses of space. This is the first perception of the infinite. 

Deeper down, deeper still, the slightly luminous impression becomes 
feeble and eventually disappears. A thick darkness sets in and also, at the 



7. Philalethes, I. 

8. Agrippa T, 5. (Editor's note: Here, as elsewhere, the version given in the Italian text is 
followed, whether or not it accurately translates the original) 



25 
OPUS MAGICUM: CONCENTRATION AND SILENCE 

same time, a vague and more defined awareness of the greater density of 
the dark region into which one is sinking. Then it seems that being, hav- 
ing become solid black, expands beyond its limits into the universe. This 
is the second perception of the infinite. 

The consistency becomes denser, more massive, and darkness almost 
becomes total blackness, up to a total opacity: the spirit sinks even more. 
At a certain point it stops, and the solidity is absolute. All of a sudden, it 
seems as if the enormous stony mass disintegrates (an instantaneous im- 
pression), and after that, a new abyss opens up underneath, the mass dis- 
solves and the spirit sinks. This is an absolute vertigo in the spirit, which 
is vanquished only by the awareness of the self as an intangible, indestruc- 
tible, tenacious, and victorious reality. Beyond this, the impression of dark- 
ness is one of a loose darkness: air-darkness. The spirit still endures, fo- 
cused, resolved to overcome the abysmal depths; it remains immobile. From 
the bottom, a new light shines forth, which, at first tenuous, becomes in- 
creasingly intense, until it is perceived in a watery consistency that melts 
and transforms the infinity of things into a milky ocean. 

Having reached this point, the sense of the spirit's infinity and uncon- 
ditional freedom is absolute, and there is no better state to be enjoyed. 
Requiem adeptus es. (You have attained rest.) But do not think that one 
must remain in this way in a state of absolute immobility, because, al- 
though the first prerequisite and the most difficult operation has been per- 
formed, what still lies ahead is the constructive phase of the ritual, which 
is just as important and which leads to the knowledge and to the experience 
of purely spiritual ways of communication. The ritual teaches one to per- 
ceive the essence of things in their immediate reality, beyond formal appear- 
ance, by inwardly realizing the Names of power and the Signatures of things. 
Thus, the spirit will be perfect not only in potency, but in action as well. 

For a brief comparison with the alchemical tradition, we should note 
that in the texts, the above-mentioned phases of darkness are correlated to 
other symbols referring to the color black, Philalethes has beautifully de- 
scribed the above-mentioned phase in the seventh chapter of his Introitus, 
after exhaustively outlining all the properties of the active spirit and its 
determinations, its whence and wherefore. The reader who is particularly 
interested in this subject should refer to that text and try to understand the 
symbols in the spirit. 



Ea 

The Nature 
of Inif iafic Knowledge 



t; 



hose who approach our disciplines must first of all realize this basic 
point; that the problem and even meaning of knowledge appear in a way 
very different from the various domains of modern culture. 

From an initiatic point of view, to know does not mean "to think/ 1 but 
to be the known object. Something is not really known until it is realized, 
or, in other words, until one's consciousness is transformed into it. 

In these terms, knowledge is one and the same with experience; thus, 
the initiatic method is a purely experimental method. As far as certainty is 
concerned, what counts here is what one has learned through direct and 
individual experience. In ordinary life, every sensation, yearning, emo- 
tion, or direct perception (a pain, a desire, an intuition) has this character. 
To speak here of "true" and "false" is meaningless; what matters is the 
knowledge of the thing itself according to an absolute "Is," or to an expe- 
rienced "h" that does not wait for intellectual recognition. In this type of 
knowledge, there are no degrees or approximations or probabilities; one 
either has it or hasn't it. 

However, for the ordinary man such knowledge is restricted to the sen- 
sible order, which has a finite, contingent, and accidental character. That 
which he ordinarily regards as knowledge is something different; it is a 
system of concepts, relations, and hypotheses that no longer has a prag- 
matic but rather an abstract character. The immediate data of experience, 
namely that which is directly evident to one's consciousness, are usually 
regarded as mere "phenomena"; one tends to posit or assume the exist- 
ence behind them of something to which one attributes the character of 
true and objective reality. For science, this "something" is matter, or the 
varied interplay of etheric vibrations; for the philosophers, it is the 
"noumenon" or the "thing in itself or some other vague idea of theirs; for 



11 

THE NATURE OF 1NITIATIC KNOWLEDGE 

religion, it is some sort of divine hypostasis. Generally speaking, this is the 
situation: a body of knowledge is organized — profane knowledge — that 
does not go beyond purely sensible experience and which has a certain 
degree of objectivity only through transcending everything that has the 
value of individual and living evidence, vision, and meaning realized by 
consciousness. What emerges is an antithesis: what is pure experience, 
due to its finite and phenomenal character, is not "knowledge," just as that 
which is regarded as "knowledge" is not experience. 

The initiatic path goes beyond this antithesis, pointing to an essentially 
different direction in which the criterion of direct experience is never aban- 
doned. While for ordinary people this experience is one and the same with 
sensible experience, the initiatic teaching claims the possibility of many forms 
of experience, of which the former is just one. Each of these forms corre- 
sponds to a given way of perceiving reality; they are susceptible to being 
transformed into one another and to arrange themselves in a hierarchical 
fashion, in levels of perception that have an increasingly higher degree of 
absoluteness. According to such perspectives, there is no "world of phenom- 
ena" and an "absolute" behind them; what is "phenomenal" is merely that 
which characterizes a certain degree of experience and a certain state of the 
Self, while what is "absolute" is that which is correlative to another degree of 
experience and to another state of the Self, which the former may generate 
through an appropriate transformation. As far as the measure of absolute- 
ness is concerned, one may say approximately that it is determined by the 
degree of active identification, namely by the degree according to which the 
Self is implicated and unified in its experience, and according to which its 
object is transparent to it in terms of a meaning, In correspondence to these 
degrees, the hierarchy proceeds from "sign" to "sign," from "name 51 to "name," 
until it reaches a state of perfect, supeirational, intellectual vision, of full 
actualization or realization of the object in the Self and the Self in the object. 
This is a state both of power and of absolute evidence in regard to what is 
known; once this state is reached, every rationalization and speculation ap- 
pears superfluous and every discussion meaningless. There is an ancient say- 
ing according to which one did not join the ancient Mysteries in order "to 
learn," but rather in order to achieve a sacred state through a deep experience. 9 



9. Synesius, Dion., 48. 



28 
THE NATURE OF INIT1AT1C KNOWLEDGE 

As a consequence of this, the initiatic teaching considers more negatively 
than positively the tendency of the mind to wander in the interpretation 
and solution of this or that philosophical problem, to erect theories and to 
be interested in some or another view of profane science. All this is useless 
and leads nowhere. The real problem has only a practical and operative 
character. What are the means to obtain the. transformation and integra- 
tion of my experience? This is what one should be concerned about. This 
is why initiation in the West has been associated less with the concept of a 
cognitive process than with that of an Art (Ars Regia) or of a Work (opus 
magnum or opus magicum), or of a symbolic construction (the construc- 
tion of the 'Temple"), while in China the notions of the Absolute and of a 
way converge in one term> c *Tao. M 

It is therefore evident that the more or less Theosophical spiritualism 
that today fills the heads of its devotees with all kinds of speculations and 
fantasies about cosmology and supersensible worlds and beings can only 
foster an attitude that is flawed from the start. Only the experiential and 
practical attitude of a restrained mind and a silent and secret action per- 
formed under the aegis of the golden Hermetic saying "post laborem scientia" 
(knowledge after work) is healthy and valid from an initiatic point of view. 
I daresay that this applies to everything else for which modern "educated" 
men claim superiority and the right to hold opinions on. Culture in the 
modern, profane sense does not constitute a necessary presupposition, nor 
a privileged condition for spiritual realization. Quite the contrary: a per- 
son who has remained outside the crossroads of culture, "psychology" 
and the various aesthetic and literary contaminations, but who displays an 
open mind, balance, and courage, is more qualified to receive a superior 
knowledge than any academic professor, writer, or "critical thinker" of our 
day and age. Therefore, those who really amount to something in the initiatic 
order can be recognized by their extreme reluctance to theorize and argue. 
If these people discern a sincere aspiration in you, they will tell you only 
this: "This is the problem, and these are the means: go ahead." 

Another consequence of the initiatic concept of knowledge is the prin- 
ciple of differentiation, which is also in distinct contrast with the ideas that 
inform modem profane knowledge. In fact, the entire modern "culture" 
(with science at the forefront) is dominated by a democratic, leveling, and 
uniform tendency. This culture regards as an "acquisition" what is within 



29 

THE NATURE OF INITIATIC KNOWLEDGE 

everyone's reach: thus, according to modern culture, a truth is such only 
when everyone can recognize it, provided they have reached a certain level 
of education or, at most, pursued some studies, which nevertheless leave 
them the same as they always were. This may be true in the case of some- 
thing conceptual and abstract, to be put in someone's head like something 
into a sack. But when it comes to experience, and more specifically to an 
experience conditioned by an essential transformation of the substance of 
consciousness, precise limits must arise. The knowledge acquired in this 
way cannot possibly be within everyone's reach, nor can it be transmitted 
to everyone without thereby degrading and desecrating it. There are differ- 
ent sorts of knowledge, and their differentiation corresponds to that which 
initiation, in its various degrees, brings about in human nature. This knowl- 
edge cannot be truly understood or "realized" by any but those who are at 
the same level, or who have an equal degree in a hierarchy that is endowed 
with a rigorously objective and ontological character. Thus, even aside 
from those occult or Theosophical expositions that are mere divagations 
or fantasies, in regard to initiatic and effective esoteric knowledge, the 
uselessness of merely theoretical communication and propagation is again 
confirmed. To reduce initiatic knowledge to a "theory" is the worst thing 
one can do. Here more than ever it is allusion and symbol that serve to 
produce illuminations. But if, as a result, there is no beginning oj an inner- 
movement, even this has no value. The very character of initiatic knowl- 
edge demands differentiation. It is natural that those who regard ordinary 
existence and sensible experience as the beginning and end of everything 
lack any common ground with that which, in its essence, is realization. All 
this should be seen with perfect clarity and also its natural consequence: 
either to give up or to recognize different criteria of truth and knowledge 
from those predominant in modern culture and thought. The way of ini- 
tiation is one that establishes substantial differences among human beings 
and reaffirms the principle of suum cuique (to each his own) against the 
egalitarian and uniform view of knowledge: according to this principle, 
one's knowledge, truth, and freedom are proportional to what one is. 

One objection worth addressing may come from someone used to oper- 
ating among tangible things and "concrete" ideas, who may say that tran- 
scendent states of being and the experiences mentioned (even if they can 
be achieved, since they are enclosed in the "subjective" sphere) merely 



29 
THE NATURE OF INITIATIC KNOWLEDGE 

everyone's reach: thus, according to modern culture, a truth is such only 
when everyone can recognize it, provided they have reached a certain level 
of education or, at most, pursued some studies, which nevertheless leave 
them the same as they always were. This may be true in the case of some- 
thing conceptual and abstract, to be put in someone's head like something 
into a sack. But when it comes to experience, and more specifically to an 
experience conditioned by an essential transformation of the substance of 
consciousness, precise limits must arise. The knowledge acquired in this 
way cannot possibly be within everyone's reach, nor can it be transmitted 
to everyone without thereby degrading and desecrating it. There are differ- 
ent sorts of knowledge, and their differentiation corresponds to that which 
initiation, in its various degrees, brings about in human nature. This knowl- 
edge cannot be truly understood or "realized" by any but those who are at 
the same level, or who have an equal degree in a hierarchy that is endowed 
with a rigorously objective and ontological character. Thus, even aside 
from those occult or Theosophical expositions that are mere divagations 
or fantasies, in regard to initiatic and effective esoteric knowledge, the 
uselessness of merely theoretical communication and propagation is again 
confirmed. To reduce initiatic knowledge to a '"theory" is the worst thing 
one can do. Here more than ever it is allusion and symbol that serve to 
produce illuminations. But if, as a result, there is no beginning of an inner 
movement, even this has no value. The very character of initiatic knowl- 
edge demands differentiation. It is natural that those who regard ordinary 
existence and sensible experience as the beginning and end of everything 
lack any common ground with that which, in its essence, is realization. All 
this should be seen with perfect clarity, and also its natural consequence: 
either to give up or to recognize different criteria of truth and knowledge 
from those predominant in modern culture and thought. The way of ini- 
tiation is one that establishes substantial differences among human beings 
and reaffirms the principle of suum cuique (to each his own) against the 
egalitarian and uniform view of knowledge: according to this principle, 
one's knowledge, truth, and freedom are proportional to what one is. 

One objection worth addressing may come from someone used to oper- 
ating among tangible things and "concrete" ideas, who may say that tran- 
scendent states of being and the experiences mentioned (even if they can 
be achieved, since they are enclosed in the "subjective" sphere) merely 



30 
THE NATURE OF INIT1ATIC KNOWLEDGE 

amount to mysticism; that the criterion of knowledge as experience and 
identification is more or less one of mere feeling, and therefore it does not 
produce, any insight when explaining, understanding, or giving an account 
of external things and of what takes place in us. These objections will be 
analyzed in greater depth further on. At this point, it is enough to clarify 
two points. 

First, when we talk initiatically about "identification/ 1 what we mean is 
always an active identification, not a confusing and merging with or sinking 
into something; it is not an infra-intellectual and emotive state, but a state of 
essential and superrational clarity. Here lies the difference between the mys- 
tical and the initiatic spheres; it is an essential difference, even though not 
immediately evident to those who, apart from things and abstract concepts, 
can see only a dark night in which, for them, all cats are black. 

The second point concerns the veiy notion of "explaining," although if 
we pursued this issue, it would lead us too fan We should begin by turning 
the tables against the objection and asserting that none of the profane dis- 
ciplines has ever, nor ever will, provide any real explanation whatsoever. 
Those who, in order to "explain," attempt to show that the contrary is 
inconceivable, must indicate how they can really "explain 15 something 
outside the abstract domain of mathematics and formal logic (in which 
"rational necessity" or the inconceivability of the contrary is reduced to 
mere coherence in regard to propositions previously agreed upon). We 
intend to refer to concrete reality However, here, from a rational point of 
view, there is absolutely nothing that exists simply because its opposite is 
inconceivable a priori. There is nothing in regard to which, beside various 
pseudo -explanations, one could not ask: "Why thus and not otherwise?" 

Ancient and traditional science, to which initiatic knowledge is related, 
has followed an essentially different path, namely the path of knowledge 
of the effects in their real causes, of the "facts" in the powers of which they 
are the manifestations, which is the equivalent of the identification with the 
causes in the terms of a "magical" state. Only such a state can lead to the 
absolute rationale of a phenomenon; only this state can "explain' 1 it in an 
eminent sense, because in it that phenomenon is grasped, or even seen, in 
its real genesis. 

The important consequence of this is that on the initiatic path the ac- 
quisition of knowledge parallels the acquisition of power, since the active 



31 
THE NATURE OF INITIATIC KNOWLEDGE 

identification with a cause virtually confers a power over that same cause. 10 
Modern men believe that this is the same in the case of their science, since 
through various techniques science brings about well-known material re- 
alizations; and yet they are grossly mistaken, since the power afforded by 
techno logy is no more a true power than the explanations of profane sci- 
ences are true explanations. The cause, in both cases, is the same; it is the 
fact of a man who remains a man, and who does not change his nature to 
any significant degree. This is why the possibilities afforded by technology 
have a "democratic" and even immoral character, like its corresponding 
knowledge: differences between individuals mean nothing to them. It is a 
power consisting of automatism, which belongs to everyone and to no 
one; a power that is not value, nor justice, which can make a person pow- 
erful without making him superior at the same time. 

However, this is possible only because, in the world of technology, one 
does not and cannot speak of a true act, namely an action that begins 
directly from the Self and affirms itself in the order of real causes. Being 
absolutely mechanical and inorganic, hence lacking relations with the es- 
sence of the Self, the world of technology represents the antithesis of any- 
thing that may have the character of real power, created out of superiority, 
or stamped with superiority, incommunicable, inalienable, spiritual. We 
must acknowledge that man today, for all his knowledge of phenomena 
and though surrounded by his countless diabolical machines, is as miser- 
able and lost as ever; spiritually, he is a worse barbarian than those whom 
he presumed to call by this name; he is increasingly conditioned rather 
than conditioning, and thus he is exposed to reactions in an interplay of 
irrational forces that ephemeralize the mirage of his exclusively material 
power and things. He is farther away from the path of self-realization than 
man was in any other civilization, because a surrogate of knowledge and 
power that one may well call diabolical replaces authentic knowledge and 
power in him. 



10. Once it is understood that knowledge, from an initiatic point of view, means 
identification and realization, it will no longer be a surprise that in some traditional 
texts, after explaining modes or names of deities, it is added that those who "know 1 ' 
them acquire various powers; it will also not come as a surprise to often hear mention of 
a "secret.," which, having been "known" or "transmitted, 11 yields the key of power. Only 
sirnpleminded people would believe that this is a matter of a mere formula that can be 
transmitted verbally or in writing, if not by telegram. 



32 
THE NATURE OF INITIATIC KNOWLEDGE 

In the initiatic domain, we repeat, authentic knowledge is justice, sanc- 
tion of a dignity, natural and inalienable emanation of an integrated life, 
according to the well-defined degrees of such an integration Just as in this 
order of things knowledge achieved beyond the uncertainty and ambigu- 
ity of sensible phenomena does not refer to formulae or to abstract expli- 
cative principles, but rather to real beings grasped through immediate 
spiritual perception — likewise, the ideal of power here is that of an action 
occurring not subject to natural laws, but above them; not among phe- 
nomena, but among the causes of phenomena, with the irresistibility and 
the right proper to him who is superior. And this superiority comes from 
having effectively disengaged himself from the human condition, and from 
having achieved the initiatic awakening. 



The Path of Awakenin 
According to Gusfav Meyrink 11 



X 



he beginning is what man lacks. 

It is not that it is difficult for him to find it. It is precisely the precon- 
ceived idea of having to find it that becomes a stumbling block. 

Life is generous; at every instant it gives us a new beginning. Every 
second we are confronted by the question: "Who am I?" We do not ask it, 
and this is why we do not find the beginning. 

But if for once we were to take it seriously a new day would arise, 
whose dusk would spell death for those thoughts that have infiltrated the 
royal palace and now sponge at the table of our souls. 

The coral reef that these thoughts have diligently created in the course 
of millennia and which we call "our body" is their work and the place 
where they dwell and breed. If we really want to reach the open sea, we 
must first open a breach in this reef of glue and lime, and then redissolve it 
into the spirit that it originally was. 




Those who do not learn to see on this earth will certainly not learn in the 
''great beyond" 

The key to the power over the lower nature has been rusted since the 
Flood, It is called, "to be awake." 

To be awake is everything. 

There is nothing that man can be more certain of than being awake. 
The truth is that he is caught in a net of sleep and dream that he himself 
has woven. The thicker the net> the mightier is his sleep. Those who are 
caught in it are the sleepers who go through life as cattle to the slaughter, 
dumb, indifferent, and thoughtless. 



11. The following excerpts are found in G. Meyrink's Das grime Gesicht (The Green Face; 
Leipzig: K. Wolff, 1917), 281-287, 291, 294-301, 360-361; and in his Der Golem (The 
Golem; Leipzig: K. Wolff, 1916), 448-450. The translation from the German is by 
Joscelyn Godwin. 



35 

THE PATH OF AWAKENING ACCORDING TO GUSTAV MEYR1NK 

To be awake is everything. 

The first step in this direction is so easy that any child can take it; only 
the misled has forgotten how to walk, with both feet paralyzed, because he 
will not throw away the crutches he has inherited from his ancestors. 

Be awake in all that you do! Do not think you are already awake. No: 
you are asleep and dreaming. 

Be firm, collect yourself, and briefly behold the sensation that runs 
through your body: "NOW I AM AWAKE!" 

If you can feel this, you will also suddenly realize that, in comparison, 
the state in which you were a few moments ago is like stupor and sleepi- 
ness. This is the first feeble step in a very long journey from slavery to 
omnipotence. Walk in this fashion from one awakening to the next. There 
is no pestering thought that you cannot thereby dispel; it is left behind and 
can no longer reach you. You overshadow it, just as the canopy of a tree 
outgrows its dried-up limbs. 

Once you have reached the point where this awakening also permeates 
your body sorrows will fall off you like dead leaves. 

The ice-cold ritual baths of the Jews and Brahmins; the vigils of Buddha's 
disciples and of the Christian ascetics; the torments of Indian fakirs to 
keep from falling asleep — these are all nothing but external, crystallized 
rituals, which like broken columns bear witness to the seeker: "Here, very 
long ago, stood a mysterious temple dedicated to awakening." 

Read the sacred scriptures of every people on earth: through all of them 
runs the scarlet thread of the secret doctrine of awakening. It is the ladder 
of Jacob, who wrestled with the Angel of the Lord all "night," until the 
May" broke and he was victorious. 

If you want to overcome death itself, whose armor is sleep, dream, and 
dullness, you must climb from one step of awakening to the next. Imag- 
ine: the lowest step of this heavenly ladder is called "genius." What name 
shall we then give to the highest ones? They remain unknown to the mul- 
titudes and are considered to be legend. 

On your way to awakening, the first enemy that will bar your path is 
your own body It will fight against you till cockcrow However, if you 
behold the day of eternal awakening that will pluck you from the sleep- 
walkers who think themselves men and do not know that they are sleeping 



36 
THE PATH OF AWAKENING ACCORDING TO GUSTAV MEYR1NK 

gods — then even the body's sleep will vanish and the entire universe be 
subject to you. 

Then you will be able to perform miracles at will, without having to 
wait humbly like a whimpering slave for a cruel God to bestow his grace 
upon you, or strike your head off. 

It is true: you will no longer know the happiness of a faithful and tail- 
wagging dog that comes from acknowledging a master above itself, whom 
it must serve. But ask yourself this question: now that you are a man, 
would you like to trade places with your own dog? 




All those who experience the earth as a prison, and every believer who 
cries for redemption — such people unconsciously evoke the world of ghosts. 

Do it too, but be fully aware! 

Will those who do it unconsciously find an invisible hand to magically 
transform into solid ground the marshes into which they stray? 1 do not 
want to argue, but 1 don t believe so. 

When on the way of awakening you go through the world of ghosts, 
you will gradually recognize that they too are nothing but thoughts that 
you can suddenly see with your eyes. This is the reason that they look 
alien to you and like beings; for the language of f onus is different from the 
language of the brain. 12 

Then the time has come for the strangest transformation that can ever 
happen to you: out of the people surrounding you, ghosts emerge. All 



12. The "world of ghosts" or "astral world" is nothing other than the world of deep- 
seated forces, partly individual, partly collective and super- individual, that are at work in 
man as a whole. These forces, as soon as the consciousness is freed from its connection 
with the brain, are projected into and visualized as symbolic images. Man then sees 
outside of himself that which, being inside of him, he could not really and previously 
know. In the world of ghosts (or "Similar Natures," as Kremmerz called them) he can 
know himself and must only know himself. At that time the apparitions look like larvae or 
ghosts, and a fearful sense of solitude sets in. This experience is eventually followed by 
another, to which Meyrink alluded when talking about the "deeper meaning" of each 
apparition; through the various energies, of which the astral images are a symbol, it is 
possible to go back to real and cosmic beings, under whose influence man has fallen and 
who have been essential for his life. If afire of knowledge and purification burns up the 
world of ghosts, what emerges from it is the first experience of the kingdom of "Those 
Who Are. * More on this later. (Note by UR) 



37 
THE PATH OF AWAKENING ACCORDING TO GUSTAV MEYR1NK 

those who have been dear to you suddenly become larvae, including your 
own body 

It is the most terrifying solitude that one can imagine. It is like a pil- 
grimage through the desert: those who do not find the spring of life in it 
die of thirst. 

This is the sign, or the stigma , of all those who have been bitten by the 
<L Snake of the spiritual world." It almost seems as if two lives must be 
grafted onto us like a slip onto a common tree, before the miracle of awak- 
ening can occur. 13 The separation that otherwise occurs in death occurs 
here through the extinction of memories, or sometimes due to a sudden 
inner upheaval. 

Everybody could attain this if he had the key. The key consists simply 
in becoming aware of one's "form of the Self or of one's shin, even though 
one may be asleep, in discovering the narrow crack through which con- 
sciousness slips between waking and deep sleep. 

The struggle for immortality is a battle for the control over the sounds 
and ghosts that dwell in us; the waiting for our "Self to become King is the 
waiting for the Messiah 

Everything 1 have said here is also found in the scriptures of every people, 
namely the advent of a new Kingdom, the awakening, the victory over the 
body and solitude. And yet a bridgeless abyss separates us from these people: 
they believe that a day is coming when good people will enter Paradise and 
evil people will be swallowed into the pit of Hell. We, on the contrary, 
know that a time will come when many will reawaken and be separated 
from those who sleep, as lords from slaves, because the sleepers cannot 
understand the awakened. We know that there is no good and evil, but 
only "truth" and "falsehood." They believe that "being awake" consists in 
keeping the senses and the eyes open and the body erect during the night 
to recite prayers. We know that "being awake" corresponds to the awaken- 
ing of the immortal Self, and that sleeplessness of the body is just its natu- 
ral consequence. They believe that the body must be neglected and de- 
spised due to its sinfulness. We know that sin does not exist, that the body 
is where we have to start and that we have come down to earth in order to 
transform it into spirit. They believe that it is necessary to go with one's 



13. In this regard, see the mention of the preliminary discipline of "feeling two" found in 
the essay by Abraxas in this chapter. (Note by UR) 



38 
THE PATH OF AWAKENING ACCORDING TO GUSTAV MEYR1NK 

own body into solitude in order to purify the spirit. We know that our 
spirit must first go into solitude in order to transfigure the body. 

It is up to you and to you alone to choose your path: ours or theirs. 

Your free will has to make the choice. 




I have said that the beginning of the way is our own body Those who 
know this can begin the journey at any time. 

Now I will teach you the first steps. 

You must become detached from your body, but not as if you wished to 
abandon it. You must free yourself from it as if trying to separate light from heat. 

Here lurks the first enemy 

Those who separate themselves from their bodies in order to fly through 
space go the way of the witches, who have turned their gross earthly body 
into a ghostly one and ride it like a broom to Walpurgis Night, 

Witches believe they are at the D evil's Sabbat, while their bodies lie 
senseless and rigid in their rooms. They merely exchange their earthly 
perception for a spiritual one; they lose their best part to gain a worse one; 
theirs is an impoverishment rather than an enrichment. 

You can already see that this is not the way to awakening. In order to 
grasp that you are not your body (as most people believe), you must rec- 
ognize the weapons that your body uses to maintain its power over you. 
You are so much at its mercy that your life would end if your heart ceased 
to beat; also, you plunge into the night as soon as you close your eyes. You 
believe you can move your body around, but this is an illusion; on the 
contrary, it is your body that moves itself, merely borrowing your will. You 
think you can create thoughts. You are mistaken: it is your body that sends 
them to you so that you think they came from you, and do its bidding. 

Sit up straight and resolve neither to move a limb nor to blink, and to 
remain as still as a statue; then you will see how your body, filled with 
hatred, rebels against you, attempting to subjugate you again. It will assail 
you with a thousand weapons and give you no rest until you allow it to 
move again. By its fierce anger and its excessive struggle, as if flinging dart 
after dart at you, if you are sly you will realize how much it fears to lose its 
control and how great your power must be if it is so afraid of you. 



39 
THE PATH OF AWAKENING ACCORDING TO GUSTAV MEYRINK 

However, to dominate your body should not be the ultimate goal you 
pursue. When you forbid it to move, you must do it only in order to come 
to know the forces on w r hich its dominion extends: they are legion, almost 
infinite in number. Your body will send them to fight against you, one after 
the other, as long as you continue to resist its urges by merely sitting still. 
The first weapon will be the brute force of muscles that quiver and throb; 
seething blood that makes the face sweat; hammering of the heart; cold 
shivers on the skin; sw T aying of the body, as if your center of gravity had 
shifted. You will be able to face and defeat all of these forces, thanks to 
your will. But it will not be the will alone; there is a higher awakening 
behind it, invisible like Siegfrieds magical helm. 

This victory too is not meaningless. Even if you were to master your 
breathing and your heartbeat, you would just be a fakir, which means a 
"pauper." 

The next champions that your body sends against you are elusive swarms 
of thoughts. 

Against them, the sword of the will is powerless. The wilder you strike 
at them, the more rabidly they buzz around you; even if you succeeded in 
momentarily getting rid of them, you would become lethargic and thus be 
defeated in a different way 

To order them to stay still is a waste of energy There is only one way to 
escape from them; take refuge in a higher degree of awakening. 

How to achieve it is something you must learn on your own. 

It is a constant and cautious proceeding with feelings, and at the same 
time an iron resolution. 

This is all I can say about it to you. Any advice that anyone gives to you 
in this painful struggle is poison. There is a cliff here over which none can 
help you but yourself. 

After reaching this state, you are then confronted by the domain of 
ghosts, which I have spoken of earlier. 

Frightening or splendid apparitions will confront you, making you be- 
lieve they are beings from another world. In truth, they are only thoughts 
in visible form over w 7 hich you do not yet have full control! 

Remember: the more solemn they look, the more dangerous they are' 

However, when you find the "deeper meaning" hidden in each of these 
larval beings, you will see with the eye of the spirit not only their living 



40 
THE PATH OF AWAKENING ACCORDING TO GUSTAV MEYR1NK 

nucleus, but yours as well. Then, everything that has been taken from you 
will be returned to you a thousandfold, as it happened to Job: then you 
will be back where you started, as fools claim sarcastically. They do not 
know that there is a difference between corning home after a long time in 
a foreign land and always staying home. 

Nobody knows if you will be allowed to share in the prodigious forces 
once possessed by ancient prophets, or if you are destined to enter eternal 
peace. 

Our path leads to the threshold of maturity Once you arrive at it, you 
are also worthy of receiving that gift. 

In either case, you will have become a phoenix: it is up to you to get 
there by force. 




One of those who still have the key of magic has remained behind, on 
earth, to seek and to rally those who have been called. 

Just as he cannot die, the legend about him cannot die either. 

Some say he is the Wandering Jew; others call him Elijah; the Gnostics 
claim he is John the Evangelist. Naturally everybody has his own ideas 
about this figure. A being like him, who has transformed his body into 
spirit, cannot be tied to any rigid form. 

The only true immortal being is the awakened man. Stars and gods dis- 
appear; he alone endures and can achieve anything he wants. There is no 
God above him. 

It is not without reason that our way has been called a pagan way. That 
which a religious man believes about God is nothing but a state that he 
himself could achieve, if he could only believe in himself. But he obtusely 
sets up obstacles over which he does not dare to jump. He creates an image 
to worship, instead of transforming himself into it. 

If you want to pray pray to your invisible Self: it is the only God who 
can answer your prayers. The other gods hand you stones instead of bread. 

When your invisible Self appears in you as an entity, you will recognize 
it by the fact that it will cast a shadow, I myself did not know earlier on who 
I was, until I saw my own body as a shadow. 



Luce 

Opus Magicum 

Fire 



±Ve is regarded as the most important element in the magical ritual, though 
not the only one. 

Several different meanings have been attributed to it, according to the 
particular functions for which it is employed. Foremost among them is that 
of vivifying principle and of purifying element, which we will now discuss. 

We should mention, among the many symbols referring to fire, that of 
ignis centrum terrae, 14 the central fire, which is common to every tradition. 
In man, the heart is at the center of his being, red with warm blood depart- 
ing from there to permeate the entire organism with the waves of life. The 
heart is portrayed as luminous and blazing, radiating loving flames and 
light. But in order to better understand this, let us remember that in an- 
cient Egypt the heart was indicated as the organ of intelligence, which is 
an exclusively spiritual faculty. The heart is the most perfect and immedi- 
ate manifestation of the spirit, and it is inviolable in its peculiar character 
of absolute harmonious spontaneity. In hieroglyphics, the heart is por- 
trayed as a vase (h'tj), with two handles or ears. This precision of meaning, 
gradually subverted over the course of the past twenty centuries until the 
organic function of ordinary thinking and also of intelligere came to be 
attributed to the brain, has accurately been conveyed in Dante's intellect of 
love. Notice again how in modern language there are terms that refer to a 
particular function of intelligence, such as the verb "to remember 1 ' and the 
expression "to learn by heart." 15 Notice also the difference between recordari 



14. Symbolically speaking, the "earth," as also the "stone," represents the human body, 
with special relation to its being Matter for the Great Work: "Upon this stone I will build 
my church" (Matthew 16:18). (Note by UR) 

15. Dante has clearly indicated this in several passages, particularly in his Vita nova, § 2 } 
where he speaks of "the spirit of life, which dwells in the most secret chamber of the 
heart . . ." Among the Romans, Plautus said: "Mihi sunt trio, corda" (I have three hearts) 
to indicate that he knew three languages — *Oscan, Latin, and Greek. 



42 
OPUS MAGICVM; FIRE 

and meminisse, between remembering and recalling. The science of language 
could make a remarkable contribution to modern psychology; shedding 
light on some hitherto mysterious points and suggesting to the careful 
observer the lost meaning of many symbols. 

Thus it is necessary that during the ritual, all the functions of the spirit, 
in its relations with the material body be reduced to the state of primitive 
and perfect harmony and consciousness. Not only is it necessary to be- 
come persuaded about this or that truth, but one must act in such a way as 
to put the spirit in full control of what it does. 




The ritual mentioned here is connected with the practice of breathing, 
which is executed according to the formula 2n (inspiration), n (reten- 
tion), 2n (expiration), n (retention) in an early phase; and 2n, 4n, 2n> n in 
a later phase, The ritual can be performed in the first phase, too. This will 
be discussed later on. For now it is enough to know the meaning of the 
spirit, assumed in concentration and in silence, which, as an animating 
and sustaining essence of man, is symbolized by breath. Breath is neces- 
sary to bodily life, just as fire is indispensable to any form of physical life, 
hence "the breath of fire" in various symbolisms. This is mentioned here as 
a guide in experiences that sometimes have various simultaneous aspects. 

Lying down, after achieving the perfect rhythm of breathing in the above- 
mentioned phases, so that this organic function may continue with abso- 
lute spontaneity and without requiring any particular attention, one de- 
scends to the roots of being through "concentration" and "silence." When 
one reaches the supreme phase and frees the spirit, this is realized as a 
small flame burning in one's heart. The body must be experienced as per- 
vaded by a wave of subtle warmth, flowing through the veins and the nerves. 
The flame burns, stating; "I am!* 1 The heart will feel as if it is burning and 
will be dissolved in the element of the magical Fire. 

In this process, the greatest difficulty (if "difficulty" is the most ad- 
equate term in relation to such an act of the spirit) consists in the 
consciousness's, the spirit's, or the Selfs descmt into the heart. In fact, we 
are very accustomed to feel and to experience ourselves in the brain. Some- 
one may even feel himself in a sense organ, when the perception is of such 



43 

OPUS MAGICUM: FIRE 

an intensity and violence that it attracts every attention toward a given 
point of the body. Thus, one momentarily feels like sinking, wherever the 
sensation of pain or pleasure has arisen. The process of descent into the 
heart is analogous to this, although none of those sensations is felt. 16 Let 
us recall the spirit's "sense of infinity and unconditional freedom," which 
is the last state of ritual silence. There should be no difficulty there in 
operating perfectly; causing the spirit to concentrate and to coagulate any- 
where it wills. However, the habit of the consciousness tied to an organ 
like the brain is such that the spirit is almost automatically attracted wher- 
ever it finds its habitual dwelling place. It is therefore necessary, in this 
case, to realize and to feel oneself as a mass of light consistency that de- 
scends from the brain, through the centers of the larynx and pharynx, 
down to the heart, slowly; following an ideal rather than a physical line, 
gently and effortlessly The spontaneity itself is actualized in the magical 
action and in its most perfect and complete form. 

As warm and vaguely bright silence (the body, as the spirit determines 
itself, acquires a bituminous consistency, the limits of which cannot be 
determined in space), the spirit becomes denser, bright, warmer. Despite 
the absence of the perception of bodily space, the spirit is aware of finding 
its place in it (a wave of warm, fluctuating light). The body becomes denser 
as the spirit turns toward the heart (a conscious act: "1 am in the heart, I 
feel it, I live it"). One becomes aw T are of it as a new wonderful immensity, of 
which few people are aware: it is no longer restricted to the usual physical 
limitation, extending its igneous mass to the utmost darkness. 

And now a clarification that needs to be deeply understood: man's life 
is ordinarily such that his action does not assign to itself its own objects, 



16. In this regard, we find useful the following instructions found in an ancient codex of 
a monastery of Mt« Athos, attributed to the abbot Xerocarca: "Sit by yourself in a corner. 
Pay attention to what I say. Close the door and raise your spirit above every vain and 
temporal thing. Then lower your chin on your chest and with all the strength of your 
soul open the perceiving eye which is in the middle of your heart Restrict your exhala- 
tions, so as not to breath too easily. Try hard to find the precise site of the heart, in which 
all the energies of the soul are destined to dwell. At first you will find darkness and 
experience resistance of impenetrable masses; but if you persevere day and night, you 
will eventually experience an inexpressible joy. As soon as you find the heart's location, 
the spirit sees what at first it was never able to see. It sees the air, between itself and the 
heart, shining clear and being permeated by a miraculous light." (Note by UR) 



44 
OPUS MAGICVM: FIRE 

but rather receives them through the physical senses, as being imposed on 
it by them. So, in reality man comes to depend on everything that is exter- 
nal and extraneous to him, on everything that is not himself. Not even the 
complex functioning of nervous reflexes is sufficient to affirm his own 
true freedom. 

From this state of affairs derives the fundamental notion of impurity, 
which, according to the classical rituals of various initiatory systems, must 
be resolved into the original purity of the burning of the secret flame, 
before the neophyte can acquire the knowledge and use of magical power. 
The fire of the spirit is thus initially directed to the catharsis of those dark 
elements that until now have ruled uncontested; to burn in the supreme 
act of a perfect "knowledge" everything that is "ignorance"; to penetrate 
into the bowels of the "Earth" and to purify "metals" from various drosses; 
"Gold," which through the help of "Sulfur" raises the inferior elements up 
to its dignity; Sperm, which mingled with the menstruum of the Whore, 
generates the Divine Child, 17 

Ritually speaking, once the spirit has been established in the heart (which 
appears as an igneous mass), waves and bright flashes surface in the con- 
sciousness, beyond the boundaries of darkness, as symbols and mediums 
of the formless passive life. In the heart the spirit creates a small flame, 
turning its essence into the latter's essence. Let the flame burn, by itself, 
without any other support than its own wonderful power — a light shining 
in the red cavity of the heart. 

This is a timeless moment. 

Then, let the flame-spirit-consciousness grow by itself, slowly and gradu- 
ally growing bigger and more intense, more tenacious, alive, and vivid, 
harder than a diamond . . . 

More and more. 

Let it burn and consume beyond the limits of the heart, expanding 
until it pervades the entire bodily nature, dissolving it into itself. 



17. The "Whore" in several alchemical and Gnostic texts symbolizes the humid prin- 
ciple, above all in its expression of yearning, passivity, and openness to receive indiffer- 
ently any form. Once this is assumed and acted upon by the initiatic fiery principle, it 
becomes transformed and fixed, giving rise to the nature of the regenerated ones. Then it 
corresponds to the symbol of the "Virgin," who has under her feet the lunar and serpen- 
tine symbol (representing her original nature), and who holds in her arms the Divine 
Child. (Note by UR) 



45 
OPUS MA GICUM: FIRE 

The purification of the elements is thus fulfilled, and the spirit gradu- 
ally acquires the immediate control, the conscious perception of each or- 
gan, of each smallest part of the physical body. 

Having reached and/ixed the last state, one needs to proceed backward 
and return to normal consciousness , following the spontaneous succes- 
sion of phases, analogous to the previous ones, until one gets to the form 
of a small flame in the heart. Then suddenly end the ritual, remaining in 
this state. 

After some time it will be easy to move rapidly to the heart and to 
arouse a flame in it. This flame will eventually remain burning as an inner 
act throughout the day; it will also be easy, starting from the heart, to pen- 
etrate any part of the body and to live in its complex functions. Thus, 
consciousness, once definitely reinstated in its natural seat, will be able to 
experience states that are very different from the past habitual ones, and to 
operate in consequence, realizing what has been expressed in the symbols 
of the inextinguishable flame. 

The ritual should be performed in the middle of the day, when the sun 
is at its zenith. 



Abraxas 



Three Ways 



B, 



now you should understand what the main task of our Art is: detach 
yourself from the humid substance that you are made of, and be regener- 
ated in the solar strength. Be transformed by it into a "being who is/ 1 or 
into a breathing center, freed from the bonds of sublunar natures. You must 
wear out the thirst, the fever, and the endless and dark yearning for exist- 
ence. This is the condition for going beyond the law of men. 

But this operation (the Hermeticists called it mortificatio and putrefactio) 
can be performed in different ways. Familiarize yourself with them, but 
also be aware that they are not equally valid for the ultimate goal. Learn 
what each one has to offer, so that by combination you may achieve the 
sense of perfect mastery. 

1) There is a first path, which 1 will call "empirical" Here, spiritual 
development has a discontinuous character: it consists of transformations 
of consciousness from one state to the next, without an intrinsic connec- 
tion between them. The Self is simply carried from one to the other: it is an 
immediate, instant self-identifying or awakening in one or another states 
of consciousness, without any direct individual initiative, and without ac- 
tive preparation, just as in a chemical experiment in which the elements 
and conditions required to produce a certain compound are known, but 
the result appears as something entirely new, as an entirely different sub- 
stance, yet you are unable to grasp the intimate relationship of the process 
of the experiment, in the same way there are methods as precise as these 
that can analogously produce new states of consciousness. 

This category includes the technique based on the action of particular 
substances in conjunction with certain attitudes of the soul, as well as 
some techniques of Hatha Yoga, which are efficacious provided certain 
physiological-psychical dispositions are in place. In this category you can 
also include some experiences brought about directly with specific goals 
by those who have the necessary power, and finally as a series of appar- 



47 
THREE WAYS 

ently spontaneous phenomenaj such as the sudden illumination of extra- 
normal modes of sensation or of self-perception in one's consciousness 
(Pietro Negri has described one such case in the previous chapter). Even 
in these latter two possibilities, there is a discontinuity and an overwhelm- 
ing instantaneity of the states of consciousness. "First this, then that." 

The negative aspect of this path lies in the fact that the realizations 
which you may attain are, for the most part, of an exceptional character. 
Rather than apprehension and a sudden intuition, an effective and perma- 
nent possession demands such a powerful technique as to completely mor- 
tify or transform the natural being. Otherwise, once the influx has ended, 
you will find yourself back in the same place you began, because your sense 
of self has retained its habit of identifying with its natural sense of being. 
When, on the contrary, everything is taken away, and if you clearly con- 
tinue to exist, the new state will be your regenerated consciousness. 1 said 
"if you continue to exist"; however, be prudent, because it is very likely 
that if you try to achieve a total fulfillment only in this way, your leap may 
turn out to be too short: unless you have gone totally "beyond," you will have 
to fight bitter struggles, with only an inadequate tool at your disposal, 18 

The positive side of this path consists of the fact that the discontinuity 
between the normal way on the one hand and the initiatic modes of con- 
sciousness on the other can never be entirely removed. These are awaken- 
ings, enlightenments, and evidences of something so new that it is impos- 
sible to give an adequate prefiguration. There can be an approximation, a 
reaching out toward them; however, the real transformation itself, the pres- 
ence, will always consist in a leap. On the other hand, only this "presence" 
can infuse in you a transcendent power to comprehend and to act, without 
which any effort on your part would be in vain. Your eye would be forced 
to look within itself, as it is surrounded by darkness; your will would re- 
main tied down, struggling, obtuse, unaware of the liberated clarity and 
powerful lightness of superior beings, 

Thus, in our way you will also find elements of the "empirical" method. 



18. See Synesius, De insomniis, 4-5, where he talks about those who tried to regain 
their freedom through the use of force, carrying their spirit "where the grasp of nature 
cannot reach." But "if the leap falls short of the limits, bitter struggles become 
necessary. . , . Even if they abandon their ascent, they still undergo a punishment for 
having attempted." 



48 
THREE WAYS 

These elements must be integrated by a personal transforming initiative, 
so that the transcendent states may be fully assimilated and your entire 
being carried into them. You will not be lost, acted upon, and "swept away" 
in these states, but will remain truly active, affirmative, present. 

2) The second direction represents that which the mystical experience 
can supply or propitiate, in a context of opportune initiatic integration. It 
is a method that essentially acts through the soul and feelings. 

In order to understand how it must be realized, be aware that the secret 
of its inception consists in creating in yourself a dual being. You must gen- 
erate — first by imagining and then by realizing it — a superior principle 
confronting everything you usually are (e.g., an instinctive life, thoughts, 
feelings). This principle must be able to control, contemplate, and mea- 
sure what you are, in a clear knowledge, moment by moment. There will 
be two of you: yourself standing before "the other." Then you will know 
the meaning of "inner dialogues," the inward commanding and obeying, 
the inward asking for and obtaining of advice, as in the case of many Chris- 
tian and Muslim mystics, and similarly reflected in many Hindu texts that 
were compiled in dialogue form; the characters depicted in them are not 
real persons, but are seen by a skilled disciple as two parts of his own soul 

All in all, the work consists of a "reversal"; you have to turn the "other" 
into "me" and the "me" into the "other." Depending upon which of the 
two principles the person focuses on, you will have the Dry Way or the 
Humid \Vay> the magical method or the mystical method. 

In the mystical method, the mind creates an "other 1 ' that still remains 
"other" (the Master, "Christ" to be imitated, and even the image of the 
Deity itself)* The Self is not transformed; it remains in the feminine part, 
which consists of desire and need. As soul, the feminine "other" reaches 
out to Him in an dan of renunciation, love, adoration, and complete devo- 
tion. Sui iuris non esse (not to be one's own law), letting ones will die 
completely, to give oneself to God with inner poverty and humility, conse- 
crating to Him every act with pure faith, wishing nothing for oneself, ex- 
periencing an untold suffering and love; this is what the mortiflcatio re- 
quires from those who follow the Humid Way since they do not possess 
the strength of an active detachment, but rather yearn for the Eternal, 
their center being located in the "Waters," in the "soul," or, in other words, 



49 
THREE WAYS 

precisely in what needs to be depotentized. 19 

However, this way has many imperfections. First among them is the 
difficulty of transcending the dualism proper to love (in the union proper 
to love, the loved one and the lover communicate with each other but also 
remain distinct) and of achieving the identity that is the law of eveiy initiatic 
realization. Thus even at the peaks of Christian mystical theology (which 
follows exactly this path) we still find a dualism that rarely generates the 
true substantial transformation into the "other," in which duality together 
with the corresponding divine personifications, marks the appearance of a 
given phase of the process. 

A relationship saturated by desire and love is, moreover, negative and 
dependent; it has the character of need. To turn it into the purely affirma- 
tive, central, and self-sufficient solar nature requires a qualitative leap and 
a daring that is very difficult for a mystic to achieve, considering the con- 
trary nature of the previous mortification. 

In addition, through the disposition from which one begins (which is 
not an active attraction and determination, but a waiting and a desiring), it 
so happens that the transcendent states appear as a revelation: you are not 
integrated in them, but remain passive and rootless under their strikingly 
miraculous power, Ruysbroeck said: "Amidst a feeling of astonishment, 
something is born: it is an act of grace. Lord, 1 am not worthy of it! " More- 
over, in a text called Light On the Path, it is written: "You will enter the 
Light, but you will never touch the Flame. 1 ' 

Thus, if you follow the mystical path, make sure to realize the "unitive 
state." It will transport you and absorb you; flowing into the universal 
Light, you will suddenly become this very same Light. With the extinction 
and fulfillment of your yearning for God, your center will "drown," and 
this drowning will appear to you as the Ultimate Good and as the highest 
goal. Our way sees "ecstasy" only as a test to be passed and as a "solvent," 
but never as the ultimate goaL 19a We do not seek "to go outside" ourselves 
(ecstasy-displacement), but rather to return and to take possession of the 
"seat of the Center." The mystical Light represents for us the "Higher Wa- 
ters," in which your individuality must not diminish, but rather reawaken. 



19. It is well to note that this is only one of the possible interpretations of the "Humid 
Way." (Note by UR) 

19a. In alchemy, this could refer to the "whitening," which is followed by the "reddening. 1 



50 
THREE WAYS 

The positive side of this path consists in the room left to individual initia- 
tive. Be aware, though, that the mystic, both by believing in the objective, 
personal, and distinct reality of the ideal of his superior principle (Jesus 
Christ, as an example to be imitated, or God himself) and by referring to 
himself the regenerating action ("the action of grace 1 *), unconsciously actu- 
alizes some general laws of transcendent praxis. According to these laws, an 
image "acts" precisely when it is not thought, but presented figuratively and 
contemplatively fixed in the imagination, and loved as if it were a true reality, 
distinct from the contemplator. According to these laws, the yearning for 
growth needs to be killed and your inner being needs to rise in silence due 
to an impersonal, calm, and occult force and not under the desire to grow. 
This desire, in fact, would paralyze growth itself and harden you, due to an 
unavoidable strengthening of the bond of the Self. These are purely techni- 
cal details that have nothing moral, religious, or sentimental about them, 
even though the mystic experiences them under this illusory and mytho- 
logical guise. For instance, in the "imitation of Christ," we find a series of 
images that act by arousing subtle forces that would first produce a "death" 
and then a "resurrection," even if Christ had never existed. 

Keep in mind that for modern man, the Royal Path usually starts from 
the humid principle, even though immediately after, this water must be 
made dry and arid. A spiritual hunger or the despotic need to entirely own 
yourself often leads to the Way It is the "hoarse and inarticulate cry of the 
humid nature" from which a "logos of light" (according to Pymander) draws 
a "pure, subtle, penetrating, rising fire." 

Thus, you can regard the special methods based on an exhaustion lead- 
ing to a self-excess of energies of the inferior nature as intermediate forms 
between the Dry Way and the Humid Way: the sacrificial way, the violent, 
orgiastic, Dionysian ecstasy, and also the path followed by the Tantrikas. 
More will be said on this later. 

3) In the magical, dry or solar way you will create a duality in your being 
not in an unconscious and passive manner (as the mystic does), but con- 
sciously and willingly; you will shift directly on the higher part and identify 
yourself with that superior and subsistent principle, whereas the mystic tends 
to identify with his lower part, in a relationship of need and of abandon- 
ment. Slowly but gradually you will strengthen this "other" (which is your- 
self) and create for it a supremacy, until it knows how to dominate all the 



51 
THREE WAYS 

powers of the natural part and master them totally. What is required of you 
is a discipline of firmness and sobriety until an equilibrium is created, namely 
the quality of a life that owns itself and is free with regard to itself, cleansed 
from instincts and from the obscure appetite of the natural being, in both 
flesh and mind. Only then will you be able to employ, usefully and in an 
auxiliary fashion, some "corrosive water" (an alchemical expression denot- 
ing violent methods such as toxic substances, the use of wine and sex, sus~ 
pension of breath, and so forth). By attacking the natural connections, these 
give the fixed and preestablished nucleus the possibility of expanding and 
bursting forth more energetically. However, if this nucleus were not already 
established, the "corrosive waters," by dissolution, would lead you not above 
but below the condition from which you first started. 

The affirmative discipline is enhanced by transformations provoked by 
some direct method, upon which the entire being, ready and compliant, 
reaffirms itself, digests and lets itself be digested, leaving nothing behind. 
These leaps are faster rhythms in which you must be able to transform the 
slow tempo of your incarnated being, in the same way that a surfer rides a 
wave; wherever the wave goes, so does the surfer, thus rejoining himself, 
remaining affirmative, firm, and centered. 

Then the solar and golden nature in you will be able to break the equilib- 
rium and be the stronger one; the other nature (your Self, your senses, and 
your mind) will be under your control At that point you can even suspend 
them, make them inert, neutralized, fixed. This is Silence, the "extinction of 
mania," the dissolving of the fog. Then, in your clarified eye, the cyclical, 
integral vision will shine forth; you will see your transcendent essence, the 
destiny of beings and of all things, and the kingdom of "Those Who Are," 
You will grasp the mode of action in a pure state, and you will grasp the 
mode of immaterial motion that operates outside every space or body in a 
timeless, creative rapidity. The center in you will amalgamate with universal, 
non-becoming nature, and will derive from it a divine strength that expresses 
itself through miraculous powers. You will be able to focus on the knowl- 
edge of the Names and on the wedding with the Letters. You will be initiated. 

The "knowledge of the Waters" and the sense of awakening need to be 
integrated with the awareness of these various methodical possibilities, in 
order to obtain a power of awareness and discrimination, before the ele- 
ments of magical practice are revealed to you. 



Leo 

Attitudes 



I 



n the previous essay; entitled "Barriers," I have outlined some changes of 
perspective that must become organic in us. It certainly takes a long period 
of time to eliminate some deep-rooted conditions that paralyze every pos- 
sibility of inner realization. We feel free in our thought and seem to our- 
selves to have achieved a great result when we reject some traditional preju- 
dice. Nonetheless, we are still at the beginning, There are ideas that have 
become an organic part of ourselves; at the moment of translating the task 
into reality, the obstacle that was overcome with the mind still exists in us 
and inhibits the experience. We wonder why we do not achieve results, 
because we do not know what in ourselves has opposed them. If we know 
all this, then it will be possible to become aware of this dualism between 
mere thought and inner constitution, between thoughts connected to the 
brain and thoughts that live in essence within us, rooted in other organs. I 
have mentioned the rhythm. When the brain loses interest in a known and 
repeated concept and lets it go free, then begins the possibility for the 
concept itself to descend in us; it will become in us a real force. 

What I have said about the changes in vision and about the new, infi- 
nite concept of the self and of the world, which, after they acquire a rhythm, 
become a new sense of ourselves and of the world itself, also applies to 
some attitudes that need to be evoked and cultivated. These attitudes are 
the necessary condition for development; they must not remain on the 
surface of our consciousness. It is not enough to think of them or even to 
practice them: they must sink into the root of our entire being. 




One of these attitudes may be called the sense of air. With the help of the 
imagination, we can experience the element "air" that permeates and vivi- 
fies everything; we can also experience its changing character, its silent 
presence, and all the gradations of motion, from subtle, imperceptible brush- 



53 

ATTITUDES 

ing to power, impetus, and violence. We perceive air as extremely free, 
rootless, without origins, without cause, prone to the most extreme varia- 
tions at a blink of an eye. After our imagination, having acquired this sense, 
has felt it and lived it — then it becomes necessary to transfuse it into us, to 
make it into a state of our own consciousness, to be maintained in the face of 
our experiences of the external world. 

This, as well as the other forms of imagination that are used in an initiatic 
manner, must be transferred from the center of the head to the "heart": it is 
here that the image can be transformed into an inner state and become a 
similar quality, or an analogous po wer. That which we have called the "sense 
of air" becomes a deep sense of freedom from what in us is hereditary and 
automatically acquired. It is a liberation from the chains of instinctive re- 
actions, of disproportionate or deformed reactions. It is a tension and flex- 
ibility that allows, besides profound rest and concentration, the maximum 
unfurling of active force. It is an open-minded feeling, ready to receive 
knowledge and experiences in their own true light, without instinctive 
and emotive deformations. It is to possess all the forces of the past, and yet 
to be able to be born again at any time with a sense of newness. 




Another imaginative attitude is that which may be called the sense offire f 
or the sense of heat. It consists in imagining the beneficial effects of heat, 
in feeling penetrated and vivified by it (as a fertile life both inside and 
outside of us), present and perennial as the sunlight. To feel in us this heat 
as our own, as if the radiant sun were in us. 

This image will spontaneously shift to the "heart"; it will directly find 
the way to the subtle centers of the heart, because it is not possible to feel 
it intensely and at the same time to retain it in the brain. This heat center 
that awakes in us will always have to be present in our inner experience, as 
an active emotion opposed to the reflective and passive emotions provoked 
by exterior causes. It is not possible to have an icy and purely cerebral 
awakening. All the rules and possibilities of an initiatic education will not 
yield fruits without this sense of fire, reawakened in the heart. This is why 
people in the past have followed the path of devotion; however, such a 
path was too often polluted by prejudices and passive emotions and could 



54 
ATTITUDES 



not bestow knowledge. By descending into the heart, people lost the sense 
of the Self and got stuck in the sensitive-sentimental domain. 




It is easy to underestimate the practices that employ visualizations, since 
the latter appear to be of no account when compared to the great promises 
of the esoteric sciences. But my experience, as I attempted and followed 
different paths, wasting time and energy compels me to help other practi- 
tioners to avoid mistakes that leave their imprint for a long time, deform- 
ing the harmony of our being. The brief comment regarding the above- 
mentioned practices will help us live intensely in the inner movements, 
detached from sensible impressions and yet with all the liveliness and real- 
ity proper to the latter. Thus we will have a spontaneous development of 
those subtle powers that act in the higher vision. 

It will also be necessary to prepare ourselves for that which we must 
see and know; anticipating knowledge with a clear mental view of what is 
awaiting us. Imagine an impossibility; a man who has lived all of his life in 
a dark cell, without human contact, without light and sound, all of a sud- 
den is thrown out into the world. What would happen to him is terrible 
indeed. And yet this is the condition of him who, having lived in the nar- 
row prison of the senses, suddenly has his spiritual vision opened. 

Even if it were possible to overcome the sense of bewilderment and 
terror, he would be aware that he was seeing and yet would not be able to 
describe it, much less know how he sees. What men seek is not so much 
some powerful ecstatic condition but rather the awareness and knowledge 
of the spiritual world, inside and outside themselves. 



Commentaries 
on the Opus Magicum 



lb 



he discourses by Luce and Leo included in this chapter outline the intro- 
duction to one of the first and fundamental operations in the initiatic art: 
the transferring of the sense of the Self into the region of the heart. In this context 
the heart should not be understood as a physical reality, but sub specie interior- 
itatis (from the inner point of view) and as the center of the human being. 

We add that, contrary to common opinion, according to the traditional 
teaching everything that is mental, reflective, and cerebral must be referred 
to the lunar, feminine, passive element; conversely; to the heart must be 
attributed the quality of the solar, masculine, and central element. 

In this regard, however, one should not think of what is commonly 
ascribed to the heart (sentimentality passions, and so forth). The occult 
realization of the heart (or of one s Self in the heart) has instead the mean- 
ing of an initial relation with the subtle or elementary aspect of reality 

There are images that, being realized in a contemplative manner, natu- 
rally favor this translation of the sense of Self (indirect method) . One can 
also try to carry out this translation directly, which will then be followed 
by the experience of a particular state (direct method). Leo and Luce have 
discussed both of these ways. 

To these matters, 1 want to add a practice with which it is possible to go 
further in this direction, and thanks to which many other disciplines will 
be greatly enhanced and vivified. This practice breaks down into two phases, 
namely the moment that precedes falling asleep and the moment that fol- 
lows waking up in the morning. 

First of all, one needs to dwell intensely on the following thought: that 
the so-called waking life of ordinary human beings is nothing but a state of 
torpor, of drunkenness and dullness, a state of fog and unreality When the 
violent voices of the external world, the impressions and the stirring of the 
senses, the power of feelings, thoughts, and actions finally cease, and when 
the invisible, occult hand of sleep suspends all this with a shroud of inner 



56 
COMMENTARIES ON THE OPUS MAGICUM 

silence — then the way for inner growth is open, through the awakening 
and the powerful rising of the Sun of Knowledge and of Reality. Unfortu- 
nately, in that precise moment we pass out and lose consciousness. 

Remembering all this during the evening, before falling asleep, in a 
calm state, not being tired, having cleansed the mind of all worries, imag- 
ine through meditation to be at the foot of a mountain in the early hours of 
the morning, ready to begin the ascent. Slowly, let the ascent begin, while 
darkness fades away and the first light, then the sun, appears. You must 
continue to ascend, imagining the simultaneous rising of the sun in the 
sky, its growing, triumphant, expanding light shining over all things. Right 
at the moment you feel you have reached the peak of the mountain, be- 
come aware that the sun has reached its zenith in the clear, bright sky 
Contemplation needs to be stopped at this point, as you recognize all this 
as the sense of that which will effectively happen within, beyond the threshold 
of sleep, until the middle of the night. Naturally; your ascent of the mountain 
and the rise of the sun from dawn to noon must be felt in strict correlation. 
Everything must be experienced from an inner perspective as a progres- 
sion of awakening. This process, once the top of the mountain is reached, 
must give rise to a sense of identification with the noon light — radiant, 
silent, pure in the boundless ether, 

In the morning, upon waking up, clear the mind from any residue of sleepi- 
ness and return through contemplation to the peak of the mountain, which is 
where you had remained; slowly head back to the valley below In the mean- 
time, the sun descends, sets, and every light will disappear by the time you 
reach the plain. This must be imagined and remembered as the meaning of 
the period between the middle of the night and the morning. In the darkness 
of the day, in which you find yourself when you awake, let the echo of the 
Light from above or the echo of the Midnight Sun linger in the sensation that I 
am the bearer of this Light that is now in your center, namely in the heart. 

Then you will notice the new, animated sense, according to which the 
light of the physical sun will appear when these disciplines are realized 
and lived. Also, you should notice and pay much attention to any other 
new meaning that flashes in the midst of common perceptions. Besides 
mere imagining, try to really recall some of the impressions of that time in 
which, aside from dreams, consciousness is interrupted by sleep. 

Keep in mind though, that wanting to remember pushes memories away. 



57 
COMMENTARIES ON THE OPUS MAOICUM 

What needs to be done is to attract memory, invoking it without desire, 
loving it. For the same purpose, it is necessary to awaken from sleep spon- 
taneously; not due to noises, and much less due to the presence of some- 
body else in your room. The memory is also facilitated by a slight scent of 
musk, rose, or Florentine iris. 




One of the instruments of operative magic is the ability to fix a feeling, to 
realize it as an obj ective something, not connected by the reference to my physical 
body; as a state that I can posit outside of myself, in space, so to speak, without 
it ceasing to be a conscious event. Nothing can be done in operative magic 
without the capability to evoke, nourish, and then free oneself (by inducing 
or projecting) from a feeling or a thought. This skill is somewhat connected 
to the descent to the center oj the earth, and thus to the seat of the heart. 

Another technical detail is in order. In order for any image to act in the 
way 1 am talking about, it must be loved. It must be assumed in a great, inner 
calm and then warmed up, almost nourished, with sweetness, without bring- 
ing the will or any effort into play, and much less without expectations. The 
Hermeticists called this agent "sweet fire," "fire that does not burn," and 
even "fire of the lamp" since it really has an enlightening effect on the images. 




In addition to what Abraxas has written, I wish to emphasize two points. 
The first point is that along the path of high magic there is no need, in 
following a discipline, to initially acknowledge the notions of "good" and 
"evil" in a moral sense. This may be necessary for a passive spirit, in whom 
the function of command is totally lacking; it is only because he does not 
find this function in himself that he seeks it elsewhere, wishing to be com- 
manded. A being who is complete and integrated on the basis of being two 
(as Abraxas mentioned before) can create in himself the power to com- 
mand and the power to obey, which are both absolute. When what is lack- 
ing is not only the power to command (heavier to most men than any 
other burden) but also the power to obey; when this inability to obey of the 
inferior part takes over, usurping the rights of the superior power — only 
then one finds unruliness, laxity, and that "false freedom" which many 



58 
COMMENTARIES ON THE OPUS MAGICIM 

mystics rightly recognize as one of the worst dangers on the path they 
follow. But this deviation should not be confused with the freedom of su- 
perior beings who know how to impose a law on themselves. Any disci- 
pline aimed at inducing the death of a certain part of one's will, and at 
awakening that in us which knows how to obey unconditionally, is an 
essential component of the magical path. 

The second point is that, especially for the operative aspects of magic, one 
needs to nourish a faculty definable in these terms: to be oneself beyond one- 
self, in the terms of an elan, an active self-overcoming, and an affirmation that 
situates itself beyond one's individuality In everyday life, heroism, heroic and 
even orgiastic intoxication, the pleasure of risking one's life, and even certain 
times of readiness for sacrifice are already signs pointing in this direction. The 
power of a life free from itself, capable of going beyond itself in this active 
form, is as important to magical and theurgical practice as the principles of 
absolute command and absolute obedience copresent in oneself. Those who 
are subject to the inner fetter of the Self either will not be able to go beyond 
the limit or will overcome it only at the cost of their own perdition. 




Abraxas has pointed out that in order for the mystical way to yield good 
results from an initiatic point of view, it is necessary, at a certain point, to 
effect a role reversal This reversal applies to the state in which, once the 
duality is created, the divine image embodying the higher Self stands be- 
fore the mystic as another being. Interestingly in Islamic esotericism there 
is a technical term indicating this change: shath. Shath literally means 4i ex- 
change of roles" and expresses the point in which the mystic absorbs the 
divine image so fully that he feels it as his own Self, and feels his earlier 
Self as something foreign. The divine image then speaks from him. In Is- 
lam there are "sure signs" to recognize cases in which the shath has objec- 
tively occurred, as opposed to just being a matter of individual self-sug- 
gestion (e.g M the case of Ibn Arabi), However, we should warn that the 
esoteric truths that are experienced in this new condition must be kept 
secret, since they are dangerous for simple believers. Apparently the death 
suffered by El Hallaj, who is nevertheless regarded as one of the main teach- 
ers of esoteric Islam (Sufism), was due to the violation of this precept. 



Leo 



First Steps Toward the 
Experience of the "Subtle Body " 



I 



ust as we express our thoughts and feelings through sounds, words, and 
gestures, which thereby enter into the world of the senses, likewise our 
body is nothing but an expression created in the material world by an 
individuated and conscious essence existing behind the human appear- 
ance as its true center and strength. Yet it would be useless to seek a paral- 
lel between the organs and functions of the physical body on the one hand 
and the inner essence of man on the other hand, since the former are de- 
termined by conditions proper to the animal life and by their relationships 
with the external world- Thus they represent a deviation, albeit one neces- 
sary 7 to certain purposes of existence. Therefore we cannot directly con- 
clude from the function of an organ, as known to ordinary consciousness, 
its value as a symbol and expression of the Inner Man. 

To say that the center of consciousness is in the "heart" echoes a Truth 
expressed in intuitive wisdom. When it was "proven" that this center was in 
the brain, true knowledge became silent and was replaced by sensible illusion. 

The study of the organs will not teach us about the inner essence of 
man any more than the mere observation of the letters in a sentence can 
convey its meaning to one who does not know how to read. The only 
possibility of knowledge lies in sinking into one's own inferiority, in order 
to follow from there the mysterious ways leading toward the material body. 




The first step consists in creating an "inner environment" in which the 
organs of our subtle body (a provisional and very inadequate, though use- 
ful expression) may be awakened to consciousness, in the same way that 
our physical organs are reawakened by the impressions coming from the 
external world. Various ways lead to this goal; 1 will mention only one of 



61 
FIRST STEPS TOWARD THE EXPERIENCE OF THE "SUBTLE BODY" 

those that 1 consider to be among the best and most certain. 

I would like to say beforehand that since the "external 1 ' world is, as we 
are, an expression of occult spiritual powers, we can engage in a relation- 
ship with external things that transcends the ordinary relationship of the 
senses, and one in which our inner being is forced to reveal itself. 

We must try to perceive, parallel to every sensible impression, an impres- 
sion that always accompanies each one yet is of a totally different kind (i.e., an 
echo in us of the intimate, supersensible nature of things) and which seeps 
silently into us. 

Every living or lifeless thing offers us a specific occult message. If we try 
to grasp in our inner being what happens when we focus our attention on 
two different perceptions (for instance, that of a plant and that of an animal), 
by gradually abstracting from the sensible image and from all the elements 
that accompany it — then we realize two distinct and "subtle" impressions. 
These impressions seem to arise from within, and unlike what happens with 
the sensible aspect of perception, they cannot be projected outside as quali- 
ties inherent to the object, but rather have a life of their own. 

This detachment from the sensory impressions in the sensory impres- 
sions (the separation of the "subtle" from the "dense," to use Hermetic 
terms, or of the "real" from the "unreal," to use Hindu terms) is attained by 
experiencing our head to be removed from and above us, almost as if it were 
external to us. 10 The ordinary sensation will fall through our center of con- 
sciousness and the other, corresponding one will take its place. 

This discipline must be repeated methodically: through an intense con- 
centration of progressive intensity and length, what will be slowly realized 
is an order of precise and directly recognizable differences. These differ- 
ences correspond to those of the impressions and images derived from the 
senses, but are of a completely different nature, though they still have an 
objective character. 

It is difficult to say more about it: only those who have had such an 
experience know how this renewed, reawakened mode of knowledge is 
accompanied by a sense of certainty and direct understanding, which is 



20, This should be simultaneously connected to the "perception through the ears o\ the 
heart* 1 mentioned by Luce in the previous chapter. This perception is solar and pure, as 
opposed to the reflective, lunar, and impure perception connected to the physical senses 
and to the brain. (Note by UR) 



62 
FIRST STEPS TOWARD THE EXPERIENCE OF THE "SUBTLE BODY 1 ' 

stronger and more complete than that which may be gained through any 
sensory impression. 21 

We can do the same with our thoughts, always through the exercise of 
distancing ourselves from our heads; then we will become increasingly 
capable of seizing our thought and using it, even before it begins to be 
articulated in its cerebral formulation. Here, too, we will come to perceive 
a new order of differences that replaces the habitual one. It is as if every 
thought corresponded to a special musical note of an infinite gamut of 
tonality each one perfectly and directly recognizable. As a further confir- 
mation, after the realization of a certain succession of note-thoughts, it is 
possible to return to our heads and to formulate in a discursive manner 
the corresponding order of thoughts, which earlier on had not been experi- 
enced as thought. However, sometimes one reaches such depths that ver- 
balization is almost impossible, insofar as the field of experiences widens 
and its content no longer bears a relation to our normal life and to the 
problems that arise from it. 

An analogous practice may take as object either the emotional contents 
of our consciousness or the various impulses. 1 do not want to dwell on 
this. The meaning is the same: it is a rapid and subtle attentiveness at the 
threshold of the Self, which catches and stops perceptions in midair, thus 
realizing a knowledge of the elements that replaces ordinary provisory 
gross, and sensual consciousness. I am not expounding here a methodical 
treatise on esotericism: rather, 1 am trying to rouse in some the memory of 
certain forms of inner activity that often manifest themselves in a sporadic 
and spontaneous way and to shift attention to them so that they may be 
recognized and developed. 

I would rather talk about the sense of self, which, on the basis of these 
forms of activity, replaces the bodily one. 

The body itself seems distant, external to us, while the impressions that 



21. We should note that what is presupposed here is that purification of the heart, 
expressed by the sign $-, which was mentioned by Abraxas in this chapter. Without this, 
the sense of superior evidence and certainty may also be projected into a mere world of 
ghosts. Then one would go from the world of reality to a world of illusion to which one 
is enslaved and in which one becomes locked up, mistaking it for supreme Truth. The 
greater part of so-called contemporary clairvoyant literature, even when no mystifica- 
tions are involved, should be judged in these terms. See also what Meyrink said in the 
previous chapter concerning the world of ghosts. (Note by UR) 



63 
FIRST STEPS TOWARD THE EXPERIENCE OF THE "SUBTLE BODY" 

are born from external objects in the way described seem to arise and live 
in ns, as a part of us. 

This is an annulment of the sense of space', what remains is an activity of 
succession, a different, inner, and rhythmical sense of time. 

Once the relationship with our body is reestablished, we will feel free 
and mobile within it. This is the birth of the so-called sense of the subtle 
body. 

Here lies a danger that causes most people to fall: it is necessary to 
avoid becoming ensnared in a sense of happiness and greatness (what Will- 
iam James called the "cosmic feeling" in The Varieties of Religious Experi- 
ence) that darkens consciousness in the torpor of ecstasy, It is necessary to 
retain the sense of the Self and the active life of consciousness, which re- 
mains superior and distinct in the experience of the various modalities of 
subtle perception that 1 have described. 

Thus any sense of satisfaction and pride throws us back into the body; 
the realization is then altered, and the vision dimmed. 

The subtle body gives us possession, but the voluptuousness of posses- 
sion is an attribute of the physical body and of the senses, with which they 
imprison us again in their domain. 



Knowledge as Liberation 



/hi 



his item was introduced with the note "First translation for Ur from the 
Sanskrit by Arthur Avalon." In the course of his contact with Julius Evola, 21 
Avalon (pseudonym oj Sir John Woodroffe) made available to the editors oj 
Ur an English translation oj the Kularnava-Tantra that has remained un- 
published to this day In the Sanskrit edition of the work (Calcutta, 1916) 
for his series of "Tantrik Texts/' Woodroffe notes that "there is in hand an 
English translation" that he intends to publish. However, later editions con- 
tain only an English summary by M. E Pandit. The present text is, therefore, 
unavoidably a translation from Sanskrit to English, to Italian, and back to 
English. All that can be claimed for it is that it closely reflects what the 
readers of Ur had before them (Editor's note). 

1. As the supreme Lord, the God of all gods, who is the highest bliss 
and the Master of the World, was sitting on the peak of Mount Kailasa, 
Parvati asked him; 23 

2. O Holy One, you are the Lord of all gods, the ruler of the five sacrificial 
rituals. You are omniscient and directly realized through Yoga. Be generous 
to those who seek refuge in you, O Lord of the Order [Rula> referring to the 
Tantric initiatic Order] , supreme law, and Ocean of the nectar of grace. 

4. 5. O Master, countless beings living in this contingent and frightful 
process of transformation experience all kinds of suffering as they are 
trapped in different bodies. They are born and die without ever attaining 
liberation. Alone in their suffering, none of them is happy Tell me, O Lord, 
through what means they may be saved? 

6. The Lord replied: Listen, O Goddess, to what 1 am going to expound 



22. For more details on the contact between Evola and Avalon, see H. T. Hansen's 

introduction to J. Evola, Men Among the Ruins, Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions, 2001 . 

23. Tantras are mostly written in the form of dialogues between the personifications of 
the masculine principle (Shiva, the "Lord of the Mountain," or the Olympian principle) 
and the feminine principle (Shakti, Parvati) of the deity. 



65 

KNOWLEDGE AS LIBERATION 

in reply to your question: understanding it frees a person from the process 
of becoming [samsdra]. 2 * 

7. Shiva is omniscient and simple; he is the supreme Brahman and the 
creator of everything. Maya does not affect him, as he is the Lord of all 
things. Alone and incomparable, he is Light itself Tn him there is no change, 
no beginning, no end. He is without attributes, and higher than the highest 
being. He is Being, Consciousness, and Bliss; all beings are parts of him. 

9,-11. All beings, plagued as they are by an ignorance that has no be- 
ginning, resemble sparks from a fire. Their action determines them, ac- 
cording to their qualities, in various names [i.e., in various ways of indi- 
viduation] : whether good or evil, their actions bind them and are the source 
of all misery. Going from birth to birth> they attain that body, enjoying 
different ages, happiness or suffering, which is proper to their state and to 
the outcome of their works. O beloved, the causal body and the subtle 
body do not perish until liberation is attained. 25 



24. The Lord does not answer the problem of liberation with a theory, but by indicating 
Shiva's state, which must be known, namely realized or actualized by one*s consciousness 
through a congruous transformation, According to this Hindu teaching, man is Shiva 
himself: the problem is that he does not know it. His being a man or any other finite 
being is supported and actualized in a body only by this ignorance (avidyft) or by 
believing to be other than Him (dvaitabhava) . This is why the center of everything is 
knowledge (vidyA), in the sense of an inner awakening. 

According to Hindu teachings, ignorance is connected to karma (understood here as 
sahamakarma and bahirmuhhi, namely as that action which is yearnings "looking out" or 
"looking at something else," or identifying with other things (aham.kd.ra). Knowledge is 
the state of "being in oneself"; kanna is this restless moving around, running about in a 
state of intoxication in function of this or that object, of this or that goal, which becomes 
the support and the justification of one's life. Since reality is one, the world of those who 
turn to "other" is a world of illusion (truly A). Karma and avidyd operate in a circle: from 
metaphysical ignorance proceeds the action in the. above-mentioned sense. This action, 
in turn, confirms ignorance and the state of intoxication and blindness of all living 
beings. What ensues is a tighter net of bonds and dependencies, which pulls one. into the. 
current of becoming. Then one becomes stuck with this or that fonn of existence of the 
so-called "causal body," which consists of yearnings and preconscious and transcenden- 
tal tendencies that the spirit identifies with out of ignorance. This being develops a 
certain bodily form through the "subtle body." The causal "body" as "karmic body," is 
therefore an obstacle to liberation: it is the "guardian of the threshold,'* a frightening 
phantasm who flees only with the rising of the Sun of Knowledge. 

25 According to this tradition, both a "good" and an "evil" action create a bond. While 
the latter chains one to a lower form of existence, the former leads to a higher form, but 



66 
KNOWLEDGE AS LIBERATION 

12. 13. The goal of all things, of both the motionless world as well as of 
all beings endowed with movement (creeping worms, swimming fishes, 
birds, beasts, people, virtuous and evil creatures, and even gods), is libera- 
tion. Having gone through myriad births in any of the four classes, as a 
consequence of some great merit, one is born as a man; only then can one 
become free through realization of Knowledge. 26 

15.16.0 Parvati, it is only through merit and great difficulties that one 
obtains the human condition after thousands of rebirths in this universe. 
Who is more guilty than one who, having reached this state so difficult to 
achieve, and which is the stepping-stone toward liberation, does not at- 
tempt to cross [the current of becoming] ? 

17. In truth, he is a murderer of his own self who, having reached such 
a privileged birth and being endowed with perfect senses, does not even 
cast his eyes over that which is good for him. 

18. Without a body, the purposes of human existence cannot be achieved. 
Therefore, when you attain a precious body, operate in conformity with its 
purpose. 

19. The body must be preserved with any means, since all things are 
included in it. Tiy to preserve it until it has realized the Truth. 

22. That which the body requires due to its own nature needs to be 
given to it in view of the attainment of Knowledge. Knowledge will awaken 
the power of the yoga of contemplation (dhyctoiayogashakti) with which 
liberation can be easily obtained. 27 

23, If you do not preserve your own Self from what is evil, where will 
you find one who, loving it more than yourself, will help it across [the 
current of becoming] ? 



neither to transcendence nor to freedom from any particular form. This freedom can be 
attained only by the state of Knowledge. 

26. We should not understand the various "rebirths" in the way of the naive 
u reincamatiomsts." These are passages through various states of existence, of which the 
human is only one in particular. In the verses of the text, mention of "myriad rebirths 1 ' 
has mainly a symbolic value. 

27. Tantrism is characterized by a valorization of the body rather than by its belittle me nt 
and mortification. The meaning of Tantric yoga lies in knowing and in dominating all 
the elements and powers found in the human body According to initiatic teaching in 
general, a state of perfect harmony of body and soul, rather than one of contrast, 
struggle, and suffering, is likely to propitiate inner development- 



67 
KNOWLEDGE AS LIBERATION 

24. 25. 27. Those who while in this life do not preserve themselves 
from what is proper to Hell — what are they going to do there where no 
help is to be found? Until this body lasts, do whatever helps you realize 
the Truth. Aim at what is best before evil overtakes you and before the 
dangers may surround you and the senses lose their keenness, 28 

35. Being dominated by Your m&ycL, O Parvati> [man] does not see de- 
spite having eyes, does not hear despite having ears, and does not under- 
stand despite knowing how to read. 

36. This world sinks in the deep ocean of time, which is infested with 
the "sharks" of corruption, illness, and death. Unfortunately very little 
Knowledge is acquired while beings are in it. 29 

41, O Beloved, death strikes man as he thinks: "This was not done," or 
"This was done," or "This still needs to be done." 

42. Undertake tomorrow's work today and tonight's work this very morn- 
ing. Death has no respect for any deed, whether it is accomplished or not. 

46. Even the gods Brahma, Vishnu, and Mahesha, as well as other mani- 
fested beings, one day will cease to exist. Thus, work hard to attain your 
liberation. 30 



28, Here we find a mention of the idea that those who aspire to '"knowledge" must 
achieve it in this earthly life. Meyrink in the previous chapter wrote: "Those who do not 
learn to see on earth will certainly not learn in the "great beyond," The human "Self 
draws its sense of self from the unity of the body. However, when the body collapses, the 
noninitiate experiences a sense of swooning until he passes on to another form of 
conditioned life. Consciousness may be preserved and endure after death only in 
proportion to what it has appropriated along the path of knowledge while in this life. 

29, When the veil of Maya is first removed, man has a terrifying experience, it is as if, 
being a sleepwalker, all of a sudden he was to wake up and realize he is on the edge of a 
bottomless pit. Then he perceives the whole world as a vertiginous falling, lacking any 
fixed point. This is mahdh&la, the devouring power of time, the ocean of samsAra in 
which the world sinks with increasing speed. They are the "shuddering waters" (<|>piictov 
oScop) treated in the Mithraic ritual that will be discussed in the next chapter and were 
already mentioned by Abraxas in chapter I. The corresponding generic designation is 
"sarnsaYic consciousness." 

30, From an initiatic point of view, the "gods" are powders that live in the conditioned 
world. Their existence may last cosmic aeons, but it is not. eternal. The only immortal 
one is he who has achieved liberation. He subsists even in the great dissolution 
(mah&pmlaya), namely in the period in which the entire manifestation, due to the 
cyclical laws, is reabsorbed. 



68 
KNOWLEDGE AS LIBERATION 

55. Detachment is liberation. All evil comes from attachment. Thus, be 
detached and grounded in the Real; in this way you will obtain bliss. Even 
the [supreme] Knower is subject to decay because of attachment: what 
then should we expect from those who are only "little knowers"? 31 

58. As long as man in his thirst for pleasure creates bonds for himself, 
the darts of worry will pierce his heart. 

66. Every day alas, man is consumed by his senses, which are like thieves 
dwelling in his body feeding on the objects of desire, deluding him in a 
constant yearning. 

67. As the fish yearning for the bait does not see the hook, likewise a 
man who yearns for physical enjoyment is not aware of the suffering [that 
comes from falling in the hands of j the god of Hell. 

69. Sleeping, copulating, eating, and other common similar functions 
are shared by all animals. Only man is fit for Knowledge, Those who lack 
it are like brutes. 

72. Everybody is busy fulfilling the duties of his caste or of his stage of 
life (dshrama). These fools, O Parvati, do not know the supreme Truth and 
will certainly perish. 

73. Others, filled with ignorance, delude the masses by preaching the 
observance of rituals and sacrifices. 

74. There are some who, being satisfied with mere words and ceremo- 
nies, remain perplexed amid rituals filled with invoking formulas. 

75. They are ignorant, being deceived by Your mdy& They think they 
can attain liberation by eating only once a day by fasting, or by practicing 
debilitating disciplines. 32 



31. In these texts, "reality" is synonymous with "state of consciousness" — i.e., with non- 
duality, 

32. We have already mentioned that this text unfolds in the form of a dialogue between 
Shiva and his bride, Parvati. The "bride" of the god personifies, among other things, his 
power of manifestation. According to the Tantra, the supreme deity has two aspects: a 
masculine, immutable aspect (Shiva-shakti), and a feminine, changing, dynamic aspect 
(mdyct-shaktl). Every manifestation is the result of the unleashing of mayli-shakti by Shiva- 
shakti. The difference between the state of being dependent and the liberated state is this: 
in the former, the may2-shakti element dominates the Shiva element, while in the latter the 
Shiva element dominates the maya-shakti element. The God dominates his maya (which 
here does not mean "illusion," but rather the power from which manifestation arises), 



69 
KNOWLEDGE AS LIBERATION 

76. What liberation can these fools possibly achieve by tormenting their 
bodies? Goddess, can a snake be killed by striking an anthill [that lies 
above its nest]? 

77. This race of hypocrites goes about acting like wise men, deceiving 
people for lucrative purposes or out of vanity. 

78. Avoid those who are given to the pleasures of this world as well as 
those who claim to know Brahman while remaining strangers to true prac- 
tice and to Brahman. 

86. Lady of the Order, all these [ ascetic 1 practices only deceive man. An 
effective liberation can he attained only by the actual realization of Truth. 

87. Beloved! The pas hits, having fallen into the deep pit of the six phi- 
losophies (darshanas), are subject to various bonds and do not know what 
is the supreme object and the goal of life. 33 

88. Engaging in vain disputes, they float on the ocean of the Vedas and 
of other scriptures; caught in the waves of time, they are victims of the 
animals living in them. 

89. Those who [claim they] know the Vedas, the. Agamas, and the 
Puranas, but do not know the supreme object, are impostors. Whatever 
they say about these texts resembles crowing. 34 



while a "living being" or "particular being" (jiva) is dominated by it. In this sense Shiva 

says that the ignorant, or those who tret outside the path of true metaphysical Knowl- 
edge (which has nothing to do with ritualism or a misguided asceticism), are fooled by 
the maya of his bride. 

33. This is a wordplay often found in Tantras, between pasha and pashu. Pasha means 
bond, and pashu animal. The latter is a term used in the Tantras to refer to any being 

burdened by instincts or even by moral and religious norms. Typical of the kaula, or 
Tantric initiate, is to become free from every type of bond or pasha. 

34. In these passages, one of the essential points of esoteric teaching is confirmed also by 
Hinduism. One can read esoteric texts and undergo the toughest practices. Yet all this, in 
and by itself, achieves little. "The supreme Truth is in one direction, the work of man in 
another." It is necessary to posit a principle; only then can things, words, and signs speak 
and grant the inner being further clarifications. In this texl mention is made of the 
method oj transmissions. The name given to Shiva in the opening of the text is "Lord of 
the Kula." Kula. literally means "noble family" but in this context it refers to the 
organization or Order of Tantric initiates and to their "chain," As in a body in such 
organizations there is a presence or a state of transcendent consciousness of which each 
member partakes and which can be evoked at will. This state may also be transfused and 



70 
KNOWLEDGE AS LIBERATION 

90. The supreme Truth lies in one direction, but mans toil is in an- 
other — while the true meaning of scriptures affirms this, they interpret it 
in different ways. 

91-97. The fool does not know that Truth is in the Self, but is obsessed 
with scriptures. A purely verbal knowledge does not dissipate the anguish 
of becoming. Darkness is not pierced by merely saying: "Lightning." 

98. Reading for those who are not awake resembles a blind person star- 
ing into a mirror. O Goddess, scriptures give knowledge of Truth only to 
those in whom Knowledge is already present, 

104. Goddess, just as a man who is refreshed by drinking nectar refuses 
any other nourishment, likewise those who have realized Brahman have 
no need for any type of scriptures. 

105. Liberation can be achieved not through studying the Vedas with a 
teacher, or through reading holy texts. O Beloved of the virus, liberation 
can be attained through spiritual realization and nothing else. 35 

106. The observance of various duties and the devotion of the Ashrama 
does not lead to liberation; not even philosophy or scriptures are its cause. 
Its only cause is Knowledge. 

107. Only the word of a Teacher imparts liberation; any teaching [based 
on mere theories] is misleading. Only a Teacher's word is life-giving; its 
efficacy is like a combustible [that relights a dormant fire]. 

108. The non-dualism proclaimed by Shiva is not related to ritualism 
or to other works; it is learned from the words of a Teacher, and not by 
reading ten millions treatises (dgamas). 

110. Some yearn for monism, others for dualism. These people do not 
know my truth, which is beyond both monism and dualism. 



induced in others. It is on ihis basis that we should understand thai "Truth can only be 
learned from the mouth of a Teacher and not from countless religious texts." That 
"word" of the Gurus regenerates, infuses liberation, creates life, initiates. The "presence" 
carried within Tantric communities (kula) is connected either to the Shiva or to the 
Shakti principle. 

35. In Tantrism the vira is a key figure. Viva means "virile man" in an eminent sense, or 
heroic type. The path of Tantras is called vira-marga, or path of heroes. Here vim and 
kaula (a person belonging to an initiatory tantric community) are often synonymous. 
Thus, in Tantrism we can see a reconfirmation of that virile and affirming attitude that 
has been rendered in this book with the general term of "Magic." 



71 
KNOWLEDGE AS LIBERATION 

L1L, There are two paths: one leads to servitude, the other to libera- 
tion. Its principles are: "I am this" and "1 am not this." Man is bonded by 
the former and liberated by the latter. 36 

LL2. This is the action that does not lead to servitude; this is the knowl- 
edge that leads to liberation. Every different action is only mania, any other 
kind of knowledge is mere exercise and a mechanical thing, 

113. As long as desire continues to burn, as long as becoming is af- 
firmed, as long as the senses have not been fixed, how can one speak of 
Reality and Truth? 

1 14. As long as there is a push toward [extroverted] action; as long as 
the mind oscillates between all kinds of resolutions; as long as it has not 
been immobilized, how can one speak of Reality and Truth? 

115. As long as the flesh prides itself and the feeling of t( I am this" 
subsists; as long as one has not procured a Teacher, how can one speak of 
Reality and Truth? 

116. Asceticism, vows, pilgrimages, repetitions of formulas, burnt of- 
ferings, worship, and things of this sort, including discussions of the Vedas, 
Agamas, and other texts> may be helpful only as long as Reality and Truth 
are unknown. 

117. Thus, O Goddess, those who strive to attain liberation must al- 
ways, with any means and everywhere, hold firmly to Truth and Reality. 

118. Parvati, what is the use of all these words? Outside the law of 
the Kaulas there is no liberation. This is the truth, and it cannot be doubted, 

120. Thus, O Goddess, man is easily freed from the bond of this terrify- 
ing transmigration, through the direct transmission of Truth by a Teacher, 

121. [Thus,] O Beloved, 1 have briefly spoken on the origin of living 
beings and of their ways. 



36, The way to liberation has as its principle: "I am not this." What matters is to abolish, 
not in ones thought but in the deepest root of existence, the so-called ahamk&ra, namely 
the evidence expressed in this thought; "I am this being, determined in such and such a 
way: that which this being is % 1 am also." I have already suggested that the first and 
necessary operation of the Ars Regia (Royal Art) consists in the disidentification or in the 
extraction (separatio) of "gold" from the "stone." 



Abraxas 

The Hermetic Caduceus 
and the Mirror 



E 



L very teaching of ours is illusory until it is translated into a practice and 
an action. You will therefore be taught the directions for the first opera- 
tions, of which you know from what I have said before. 

First, you need to become the master of a part of your life, or at least of 
your day, in order to firmly and actively establish a new quality — thus; 

Become innerly detached from yourself and from what surrounds you; 
maintain a sober, effortless, neutral, and well-balanced lifestyle, without 
excesses. Sleep only as needed and eat little. 

Let your body be whole, calm, harmonized. Temper your soul with the 
power that is in you; cleanse it from impulsiveness, passions, restlessness, 
and then stabilize it and amalgamate it with your body. 

Other beings do not exist. Do not let their actions, thoughts, or judg- 
ments affect you, no matter what they are. 

Make sure that nothing will secretly creep into you: watch over every- 
thing that comes from the outside and that emerges from the unexplored 
depths of your consciousness. Observe all things in silence with your mind 
and remain unperturbed, stopping every judgment with a firm hand. 

If passions bother you, do not react or become perturbed. Bring them 
deliberately to satisfaction, and then get rid of them. 

Grow in this direction until you are able to realize the frivolity, useless- 
ness, and the threat of every thought, so that your mind, too, may slowly 
calm down and silently crouch at your feet. 

In this way you can slowly build up a strength inside you, similar to a 
lord whose glance instills silence, respect, or confusion in the servants 
around him. This is our Gold: 0. 

When you will do this with a subtle, constant, strong, and gentie art; when 
the equilibrated and neutral state in you has finally become a continuous 



73 
THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS AND THE MIRROR 

and natural thing — then you will feel connected again to yourself, enjoying 
a sense of interiority such as you have never experienced before. At this point 
you will experience a propensity to rest in yourself, and from this calm and 
enlightened rest, a sense of spiritual and free contentment will ensue. 

Observe this sensation and retain it. When you will possess it entirely 
(through an inner act that 1 cannot tell you about, since you will learn it 
only after you have invented it), try to connect it with the body so that it 
may pervade it as warmth pervades water; in the end, of the two, only one 
thing, one state will result. 

This is the fluidic state, 

This operation in our Tradition is called "the first extraction of Mercury 
(or of Hermes V) from the Mine." 

Let your consciousness hold on to this state, with a calm firmness. Let it 
go, then evoke it again repeatedly; study it, learn it until you feel it as a reality 
awaiting in the subconscious, ready to emerge at your command. When you 
have conquered this point, you can be sure you have progressed far enough. 

You will be instructed about the various properties of the fluidic body 
only in relation to the various operations, the first one of which 1 am about 
to reveal to you. Know that every sexual encounter that is dominated by 
the thirst for pleasure paralyzes it, makes it weak and languid — especially 
in people with nervous temperaments. Know that the fluidic body is ener- 
gized by a vegetarian diet, 37 fasting, and even magical aromas, as is hinted 
in one of its names ("aromatic body") and in one its particular aspects (the 
"vampiric'O- Know that every sudden loss of equilibrium or strong emo- 
tion that occurs when consciousness is in relationship with it may cause 
serious harm, in both the body and the psyche. Know that its virtues must 
be sharpened through a special discipline. 



37. According to an occult law, every energy of a being that is not being actualized in that 
being constitutes a burden and an impediment in every initiatic operation. In human beings 
there are particular forces of organization, which absorb and transform the food. As we 
move from the mineral to the human domain we find an increasingly organized matter. 
By eating vegetables we unleash forces that would not be manifested by eating meat, 
since in animal material the effort of organization in regard to the vegetable world is 
already resolved. This is how vegetable food propitiates a higher degree of fluidic 
presence and dynamism. Moreover, we can avoid the danger of certain psychic infections 
that can be positively resolved only by applying the inner fire in a special work of 
transformation, aimed at turning the "poisons" into "vital juices." (Note by UR) 



74 
THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS AND THE MIRROR 

Let me give you an elementary hint about it, so that you may under- 
stand the sense of the initiatic education of your feelings. 

You should not destroy feelings, but rather destroy your stubborn cling- 
ing to them, namely pleasure, desire, aversion, and anguish. Purify your- 
self from such dregs; become free from the bond of the heart; be open, free 
from fears and pettiness in your feelings. In the way deep, clear, still water 
reveals what is at the bottom, likewise no longer identify yourself with 
your feelings, but rather receive them and observe them as you would 
external things. Let this thought be born in you: "Just as I am not the food 
I taste, likewise I am not the feelings that I allow to echo freely in me: they 
are not mine, they are not me." 

Only then will feelings be able to speak to you — when you cease to be lost 
in them and concerned only with enjoying or suffering. They will reveal to 
you a new organ of sense beyond the animal ones, as "objective" as they are, 
though oriented to a more subtle aspect of reality. Educate this new sense 
with inner attention, focusing on the ear of the heart; make it as refined as 
you can. At the center of yourself, like a spider that keeps under control all 
the strings of its web and their vibrations, let there be a calm self-control and 
a scrutinizing lucidity purified and fearless, open to every voice. 

This education of the heart, which you will operate through "persua- 
sion," with a slow and gentle "fire," will eventually infuse a supersensible 
power of knowledge into your fluidic body This education realizes a "dis- 
tilled water," a transparent water consecrated in the sign of your neutrality 
that dominates it: ^ 3e 

Having done that, attempt the liberation of the central power © and 
the encounter with the Serpent. This happens when the consciousness of 
your "Self 1 is able to transfer itself into the seat of the fluidic body and 
when the latter is detached from the animal senses and consequently iso- 
lated from the physical world. 

There are several techniques that can be employed. Scorn the cautious- 
ness of the petty methods of "meditation," which can rarely free you — truly, 

38. The Catholic Church has various symbols susceptible of having an esoteric meaning. 
For instance, when the "heart" that Jesus "carries in the palm of his hand," surmounted 
by a cross and surrounded by flames, is slightly altered, we have precisely the £, an 
alchemical sign that has the above-mentioned meaning. Its "flames" are connected to the 
"ignition of the Astral Light," which has a far different meaning from the one supposed 
by its devotees. 



75 
THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS AND THE MIRROR 

not just in your imagination — from the quagmire of mental forms and the. 
prison of the brain. Employ instead direct techniques. Use the "Mirror." 

In order to isolate the fluidic body, it is necessary to first neutralize and 
deactivate the sensitivity of the physical body. The "Mirror" technique acts 
on the optical nerve and fatigues it, until the power concentrated in the act 
of staring is freed from the physical organ and actualized in the fluidic light. 39 

Proceed as follows. Find a clean room, preferably outside the frantic 
atmosphere of big cities, in the countryside, or in a place where silence 
rules and nothing can possibly distract you. Seal yourself off from every- 
thing that is outside of you. Dry and clear nights are preferred. Do not 
wear clothes that are too tight, or engage in practice with a full stomach. 
Open the windows, burn some myrrh, and then sit before a mirror. 

Having made up your mind, repeatedly and persuasively evoke the 
fluid state that the slow and deep inspiration of the myrrh in the air will 
make more lively; join it closely to a sense of yourself as a "presence 51 and 
impassible superiority fit for command. 40 Then stare at the mirror. 

The mirror can be of crystal, steel, copper, or bronze; it should be con- 
cave so as to collect the light of a lamp in a central point. The lamp ought to 
be positioned in such a way as to remain hidden from sight and to cast a dim 
light around you except for the mirror 41 Stare at the central point of light in 
the mirror, without blinking, until everything is phased out. Keep at it. This 
point will turn into a black hole. The black hole will first grow into a bluish 
spot, then into a faint aura, and finally into a milky white one. Soon enough 
this whiteness will produce a rapid expansion of a fresh and bright light. 

This is the threshold of the supersensible, and the first contact with the 
"Astral Light," in which the subsistent nucleus is freed, in principle, from 
the conditions burdening the incarnated beings that dwell at the bottom of 
the "waters." 

As I said, stare at it, This is both all and nothing, "Staring" is a verb that 
encompasses a long search, an uncertain path built with the secret art of a 



39 + This is the same goal of the yoga technique called pratayara, which consists in 
staring at a certain part of one's body or at an external object, (Note by UR) 

40. This is more organically and directly effected if one succeeds in transferring ones 
sense of Self into the heart, as was described in the preceding chapter. (Note by UR) 

41. Some useful technical details on the construction and employment of magic mirrors 
can be found in E B, Randolph, Magia sexualis (Paris, 1952), pp. 133-215. 



76 
THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS AND THE MIRROR 

careful, subtle, and prudent dosage, combining and equilibrating the ac- 
tive and the passive, the sensitive and the determinative elements of the 
soul. I can be of little help here. You must open the way by yourself and 
walk with your own feet. 

Let your staring be effortless, without apparent will (like fire under the 
ashes), as if you were about to gently fall asleep. Stare at it and then aban- 
don your gaze, try not to think about it anymore; forget about it. Sight is 
the starting point, but in reality your whole soul will be active in the op- 
eration, and its fixed staring is only a means to fix itself. 

Intensify this abandonment by loving it, agreeing with it, tempering it 
with a sweet persistence, until it becomes a continuous thing that no longer 
seeks to resist you, when you push it even deepen On the other hand, you 
must resist a presence that is subtle and not subjected to you — namely 
yourself as a simple point that fear cannot halt and that knows how to 
retain and preserve itself. This presence does not obstruct the direction of 
your abandonment, riding it instead, not becoming dissolved during the 
various phases, but rising up again with the unexpected experience of a 
greater simplicity strength, and transparency What occurs here is an ini- 
tial convergence of Sulfur and Mercury of Sun and Moon; you must know 
the work as the first preparation of the Caduceus of Hermes. 

The obstacles — aside from those that occur at the end of the opera- 
tion — consist in the excessive or unbalanced mixture of the mercurial and 
sulfuric elements. I have said that the preparation should make the bodily 
nature calm, pliant, and harmonious, under your control You must now 
take this nature gently and lead it to the operation without alerting it. If 
you are impatient and clumsy, employing excessive force, the bodily na- 
ture wall react, and free itself of you; in an instant, you will be thrown back 
to the starting point. At first these instinctive reactions are unavoidable, 
but they should not discourage you. Try again, with a new spirit, at the 
same hour, and subtly insist, as Eliphas Levi says, like "the wave that ever 
returns and eventually carves even iron/' 

The reactions and instinctive alarms of your body will be followed by 
those of the spirit if the latter is not strengthened enough. You will experi- 
ence a sort of fainting, the sense of the ground giving way; you will shud- 
der and rapidly react and thus find yourself back at the starting point. 42 



77 
THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS AND THE MIRROR 

The way will remain closed until you awaken in yourself an even faster 
readiness, with which you will suddenly stop the reaction before it sus- 
pends the fluidic detachment. 

The opposite defect consists in the possibility of abandoning oneself to 
abandonment, thus dissolving self-awareness. This would lower the world 
of magicians to the world oj mediums and of visionaries, the world of the 
supersensible to the world of the subsensible. In the medium, the center is 
dissolved and his consciousness slips down, becomes immersed in the body, 
becoming the body's own consciousness. A medium is fully dependent on 
the body; what he experiences are emergences and "projections" of the 
turbid tendencies and the elementary forces enclosed in his organism. The 
sign of this perversion and abortion of the operation is a sense of deadly 
tiredness that will overtake you as soon as you return to the normal state, 
since other forces will have fed on your strength. 

To create an ever more decisive preponderance of the intellectual cen- 
ter over the peripheral sensibility that is in contact with the external world, 
and also over the organic and subconscious elements — such is the work of 
the "preparation" mentioned at the start of this essay. This preponderance 
leads to the already mentioned state = 0, where the mind joins itself and 
realizes the experience of independence, subsistence, and superiority in 
regard to everything that is bodily and animal. When the detachment of 
the fluidic body occurs* through your fixing that is made continuous and 
boldly intensified in the inner direction, one support is taken from you; 
you must remain absolutely steady in this pure, immaterial, extra-cerebral 
state of mind and of the "Self." If you are not up to it, the mediumistic and 
sleepwalking state sets in, in which the liberated fluidic body lacks a 
nucleus, thus becoming a passive instrument of the inferior world. 

However, if you actively go beyond the neutral point, you will realize 
the "Rebirth in the Mind" in the "Magnesium of the Wise" (the Elixir). From 



42. The reader should note the analogy with those sudden jumps that often occur 
without apparent reason before falling asleep; during sleep a natural, unconscious, 
involuntary separation of the fluidic body occurs, followed by a state of passivity of the 
Self before the forces to which it owes its existence and which replace it during sleep. To 
those who understand, this analogy can already supply the directives for a second 
method. We may recall that in a previous chapter Meyrink has specifically said that the 
secret consists in becoming aware oj the "form" of ones Self, of one's "skin," while sunk in 
sleep, or better, at the moment of falling asleep. (Note by UR) 



78 
THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS AND THE MIRROR 

the golden nucleus of your perfected, concentrated, and one mind = 1, an 
intellectual light will break forth, in which you will realize a new, powerful, 
transformed sense of Self. You will be able to see. You will be awake. 

Philalethes says (Introitus, ch. I and XIII): "Through our gold (0 = the 
Sun, which is the awakened nucleus made from the preparation) the same 
occurs (as through the seed) ; at first it is dead, or rather its enlivening virtue 
is hidden beneath the thick husk of its body. ... As soon as il is bathed with 
our water (which is 3, the fluidic), it is reborn, regains life, and becomes the 
Gold of the Philosophers. . . « The fixed = becomes volatile for a time, so that 
it may inherit a nobler quality that then serves to fix the volatile.''' 

With this experience your "Self ' abandons the animal vehicle, which is 
enslaved to the "waters/ 1 and assumes a fluidic body (or "body of air") as 
an organ for action, with which and through adequate determinations it 
can operate multiple and miraculous works. And if, due to the reassumption 
of the animal body you were to encounter difficulties, remember: the 
method is to evoke the image and to will it. 

For the magician it is imperative to escape in any possible way from the 
atmosphere of enslavement and intoxication that is the "soul of the earth"; 
to enter in a conscious contact with the world beyond, and to act from there, 
directing corresponding reactions and effects in real life. His spirit, accord- 
ing to Kremmerz, is like a flame that goes up and down: he knows how to 
rise to the surface of the current of the "waters" where, being consecrated in 
"air," he is virtually empowered to subject all the beings that depend on this 
current, which now appears as the very "Astral Light" itself. 43 

I have shown you a way. Try what I have said before thinking of any 
other operations. Do not believe that the task is easy and without dangers; 
also, do not expect anything from the initial attempts. If you persevere and 
master your doubts, you will succeed. Dare and be silent. 

The strongest force is the will of man who knows what he wants. Set the 
goal, then, and never change it. After you have started never, ever quit, no 
matter what, because, as I have told you before, the path of Magic does not 
have "dead corners." One does not have to embark upon it, but once you 
have done so, there are only two alternatives: succeed or perish. 



43. From these teachings, among other things, we can see the sense of the symbols of the 
"bird," the animal that "lives in the air," and of the "fish," the animal that freely moves in 
the "waters/' 



Luce 

Opus Magicum: 

The "Words of Power" 
and the Characters of Beings 



Ti 



hose who have been involved in magic, whether out of simple curiosity 
or due to an earnest desire to know, or in order to acquire the fabled powers, 
have been dumbfounded when, in the course of rituals, they have come 
across formulas containing either words that look totally unintelligible, or 
geometrical and nongeometrical signs called "characters" or "seals" of u spir- 
its," the use of which is suggested without an apparent reason being given. 

I have already mentioned this briefly elsewhere, when writing about 
magical herbs, giving some significant elements. 44 

It is opportune to note that almost all the words of the rituals are nomina 
barbara (barbaric names) — i.e,, words from other languages (Latin, Greek, 
Hebrew, Chaldean, Egyptian) , badly transcribed, and then further distorted 
by ignorant scribes and even authors. 45 Thus, in order to recover their ex- 
act meaning, it would suffice to transcribe them back into their original 
language, which almost always reveals particular attributes of the supreme 
being. For instance, the common rendering Eye Seraye would be better 
transcribed as Eieh asc£r Ei£h, which is one of the "divine names 51 found in 
Exodus 3:14, where God himself answers Moses from the burning bush, 
revealing his name: 



44. See the journal Ignis, 1925, pp. 338-339. 

45, A classic example of widespread ignorance is the mistake found in Matthew 26:46 and 
in Mark 15:34, which report Jesus' last words: "Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?" (Mark has the 
variation "Hoi 11 maybe because in Greek the diphthong ox was pronounced T'). Tn twenty 
centuries nobody realized that sabachthani does not exist in any living or dead language. 
This speaks volumes for the great wisdom of those who transcribed the Hebrew word 
nasavtani, in an almost identical phrase found in Psalm 22:2, meaning: "My God, my God, 
why have you abandoned me?" (Hebrew: A.L.I. A.L.I. LM.H. 'S.VIN.L) 

Those who are interested in the divagations made around the "name of Jesus" are 
referred to the learned study of 5. Savini in Ignis, 1925, pp. 144ff. 



80 
OPUS MAGICUM: THE "WORDS OF POWER" AND THE CHARACTERS OF BEINGS 

A.H.I.H. A.SCR. A.H.I.H. 

According to one of the many interpretations, these words mean: "I Am 
He Who Is," 

In other cases it is opportune, as Trithemius suggests, to transcribe the 
words in Chaldean characters, since they sometimes have a meaning in 
the Chaldean language that was employed by the priests of a people who 
belong among the first and main founders of the Mediterranean Tradition, 
Moreover, in the texts we find words that cannot be reduced to a particular 
meaning, either because they consist only of vowels or only of consonants, 
or of combinations of vowels and consonants that do not lend themselves 
to any possible interpretation or philological derivation. These are the real 
"words of power. 9 ' 

The words of power — as they were called in Egypt — had various names 
among different peoples and schools or orders that employed them. The 
Greeks called them cScarpa ovojaaxa. The first term may indicate not only 
that such names are unintelligible and obscure, but also that they are un- 
known and misunderstood by the profane. The expression may also mean 
that they are names without a sign, in other words, names the profound 
sound of which can be uttered or perceived only in a sudden illumination 
of the spirit freed from any physical bond. Their existence, however, is 
attested in various forms of the Tradition. They have been transmitted as 
magical sounds, nomina arcana (secret names); in particular, the combina- 
tions and permutations of vowels were called voces misticae (secret sounds) 
or mystical syllables. The Greeks called them 5v.6yoi a7CEp(iaxiKo{, or "causal 
words"; in the Hindu tradition they were known as "mantra," or natural 
names, meaning that these words belong to the original and perfect lan- 
guage, in the correspondence between the term containing the essence of 
the thing and the thing being signified. 

Despite the fact that realization of the words of power unfolds on an 
eminently practical plane where it is preferable to remain free from any 
theory or presupposition, I will now briefly discuss the doctrinal aspects 
that refer to them. 

In the highest potency, the Word realizes itself fully and perfectly be- 
cause it contains in itself the principle of every manifestation, actualizing 
itself in it with a linear correspondence between the realizing will and the 
realized being. 



81 
OPVS MAGICUM: THE M WORDS OF POWER" AND THE CHARACTERS OF BEINGS 

The word is the means of realization and may also be made humanly 
perceptible, by bringing it to an octave that humans can hear. 

That the word is such a means is indicated by the analogical law, ob- 
serving how every manifestation originates from a center of power that 
acts by transmitting its energy in particularly wide and frequent waves. 
These waves may be perceived as sounds. 

By analogy it is possible to intuit the law of formation of the characters 
of beings, recalling the hieroglyphics that Lissajous obtained through tun- 
ing forks, and the bizarre figures that Chladni obtained by vibrating thin 
plates covered with very fine sand. 

The word, therefore, is not only a sound, but also a form. Thus for 
every being there is a corresponding name and character, or signature, which 
is proper to it alone and not to any other 

The traditional elements of this doctrine are preserved in the Sepher 
Jetzirah, the most famous Kabbalist text, in which the resonant concept is 
turned into a luminous concept, and the nomina arcana and the signatura 
rerum (the characters of things) are called names of light or letters of light 




Descend into "Silence" (see chapter I) and, having realized it, try to expe- 
rience your own body and especially your imaginative faculties as func- 
tions of the self, detached from the deep reality of being, though not free, 
but rather as completely dominated. 

This act of the spirit should reach such a perfection that when it is 
actualized, it should not even slightly affect the state of "silence"; thus this 
act should not cause the spirit to regress to a more normal and more mate- 
rial level of consciousness. 

In this first phase you need to proceed gradually investing first your 
body as physical; then the mind, as thought; then the imagination, which 
is the highest and least-known faculty of creating images, so extremely 
important in magical practice. 

It is obvious that what I am saying cannot and should not be attempted 
without first being absolutely perfect in the ritual I have described above. 
This is for two reasons: first of all no result would be obtained, except wast- 
ing time and possibly experiencing some psychic shock. Second, because 



82 
OPUS MAGICVM: THE "WORDS OF POWER" AND THE CHARACTERS OF BEINGS 

in the still formless previous operation some elements would prevail that 
would compromise the accomplishment of the earlier ones. It is necessary 
to be among those perfect ones before attempting the first phase of this 
ritual, which, again, requires much perseverance before being mastered. 

In the second phase, as you are able to live your own imagination as a 
pliable instrument, create the image of any being, grasp it, and plunge it 
into the spirit. Then you will hear a sound that no mortal ear is allowed to 
hear, which is the secret name of the thing. At the same time, without 
physical eyes, you will "see* a slight luminous trace where the being has 
been placed, designating its character. 

Having done this, dissolve the image and emerge from the "silence."" 

This can be done for the whole infinity of things. 




In the operations of Ceremonial Magic the same results can be achieved by 
adequately "coagulating" the form being projected and by invoking the 
supreme intelligences with the proper formulas. Thus, the occult name will 
vibrate so intensely as to be heard even by those present; the character will 
reveal itself by tracing great fiery lines. 



82 
OPUS MAGICUM: THE 'WORDS OF POWER" AND THE CHARACTERS OF BEINGS 

in the still formless previous operation some elements would prevail that 
would compromise the accomplishment of the earlier ones. It is necessary 
to be among those perfect ones before attempting the first phase of this 
ritual, which, again, requires much perseverance before being mastered. 

In the second phase, as you are able to live your own imagination as a 
pliable instrument, create the image of any being, grasp it, and phmge it 
into the spirit, Then you will hear a sound that no mortal ear is allowed to 
hear, which is the secret name of the thing. At the same time, without 
physical eyes, you will "see 17 a slight luminous trace where the being has 
been placed, designating its character 

Having done this, dissolve the image and emerge from the "silence," 

This can be done for the whole infinity of things. 




In the operations of Ceremonial Magic the same results can be achieved by 
adequately "coagulating" the form being projected and by invoking the 
supreme intelligences with the proper formulas. Thus, the occult name will 
vibrate so intensely as to be heard even by those present; the character will 
reveal itself by tracing great fiery lines. 



Pietro Negri 

Knowledge of the Symbol 



A, 



tccording to Dante (Convivium, II, 1), "texts can be understood and 
expounded according to four senses"; the literal sense; the allegorical sense, 
which, Dante says, "is a truth concealed behind a beautiful lie"; the moral 
sense; and the clnagogical sense. This anagogical sense occurs when "read- 
ing in a spiritual way a scriptural passage, which in its literal meaning and 
in the things being signified points toward the things of eternal gloiy"; in 
other words, it is the innermost meaning of a text that, even when it has a 
literal sense, deals with topics of a spiritual nature. This latter sense must 
be clearly distinguished from the allegorical and moral senses, which in 
comparison with the anagogical sense, at least from a spiritual point of 
view, have a secondary importance. In my opinion, the anagogical inter- 
pretation of the Divine Comedy still needs to be undertaken. 

Dante calls this anagogical sense "super-sense." av-aycoyf] (an-agogy) 
means "to lead" or "to carry upwards," or "to elevate." Moreover, when 
employed as a technical naval term, it designates the act of weighing anchor 
and sailing away. Metaphorically speaking, when it. is referred to spiritual 
topics, anagogy therefore indicates spiritual elevation or a rising up from the 
earth. In the symbolism of "navigators," it designates leaving that "earth" or 
tewafirma to which human beings are tenaciously anchored, in order to 
hoist the sails and to find a strong current, heading toward the open sea. 

Dante was referring to the writings of "poets," although the distinction of 
the four senses may undoubtedly be applied to sacred and initiatic writings 
and to any means of expression and representation of spiritual facts and 
doctrines. According to this distinction, the "super-sense" in every type of 
symbolism is always the anagogical sense. The full understanding of sym- 
bols consists in the perception of the anagogical sense concealed in them; if 
anagogically understood and employed, they may even contribute to spiri- 
tual elevation. In this sense, symbols are endowed with an anagogic virtue. 

Naturally, not all symbols are endowed with such virtue. By extension, 



84 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

sometimes the name "symbols" is given to mere characters and emblems 
that have almost exclusively the value of representation. Thus the symbols 
of mathematics and chemistry do not possess, as such, this anagogic vir- 
tue. It is possible in these domains to attribute the same sense to very 
different symbols. For instance, algebraic multiplication may indifferently 
be indicated with the symbol of a cross or a dot. But the word "symbol," in 
its more proper meaning, has a very precise and complex meaning, as we 
can easily see from its etymological analysis. 

In Greek, the term au|_i-poX,f| (sym-bole) designates the act of joining, 
putting together; the related term al>j-i-po3lov (sym-bolon) indicates 
agreement, and thus the sign, or mark. Both of these words consist of two 
elements: first the prefix aw (syn; in Latin cum) merely indicates conjunc- 
tion, while the latter designates and specifies the character of this con- 
junction. BoXf| (bole) and poXoc; (bolos) indicate the act of throwing. 
They are terms connected to the verb fi&XXw (ballo), meaning "to throw," 
"to strike," "to cast." The verbauja-paXXco (sym-ballo; "to reunite") and 
the analogous term ai3|i-f!oA.ov (sym-bolon; "symbol") designate the act 
of reunion, while the synthesis (ow-Qeaic; [syn-thesis; in Latin compositio}) 
indicates the result of this action. The dynamic character of the symbol is 
opposed to the static, immanent character of the synthesis. In regard to 
the effect of the action, the verb au^i-(3d/lX.03 (sym-ballo; "to reunite") is 
opposed to the verb Sia-p&/Uuo (dia-ballo; "to separate, to oppose"); cor- 
respondingly, theoi&|LiJ3oX,ov (symbolon) is the opposite of the "devil" (8id- 
potax; [dia-bolos; "transversal, adversary"]). The attribution of dynamic 
and magical virtues to symbols in order to overcome diabolical opposition 
and adversities is philologically obvious. And just as the symbol leads to a 
synthesis, its opposite, the "devil," is what leads to the opposite of synthe- 
sis, namely to analysis: in fact, av&Xvoiq (ana-lysis) is solution, break- 
ing down, dissolution, death. 

In a way the dynamic virtue of symbols is opposed to every analysis, 
and it acts as the instrument and as the means of arriving at a synthesis. 
Just as in discursive knowledge one arrives at the thesis conceptually, in a 
logical way, starting from a hypothesis, likewise in the initiatic endogeny it 
is possible to arrive at a synthesis by employing the dynamic virtue of 
symbols, in a magical way, starting from the original human condition. 
These mere etymological considerations already allow us to see how in 



85 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

higher knowledge symbols have a corresponding role to that played by 
concepts in discursive knowledge. The correspondence between symbols 
(cruv|3o^oi) on the one hand, and concepts (con-ceptus, con-cipio) and syl- 
logisms (auv-Ajoyt^ovai [syn-logixonai; "to com-pute"]), on the other 
hand, is a perfect one. In Logic, the syllogism unites the word (Xoyoq, 
logos) with the thought ([i.e., the act of "pondering/ 1 Latin pensare] from 
pondus = "weight"; to ponderate means to weigh) , and leads in a discursive 
manner to consideration and to measurement (mensura from mens, mind, 
connected to mensis, month, and thus to the moon, which does not have its 
own light but a reflected one, or reflection). The symbol in the magical 
science or in the pure and purifying science of the Magi (Persian ma)idan > 
''purifying," through/ire) works with the poXf| (bole), the irradiation, the 
projection, the fulguration. The word of logic corresponds to the opera- 
tion, or to the action of magic, just as the "Great Work" of the Hermetic 
and Masonic tradition corresponds to the philosophical discourse. 




Due to the very character of its composition, the symbol is different from 
and superior to the emblem, the insignia, the parable, the metaphor, and 
the allegory. 

Emblem (from ev-|3a?iAxo [en-ballo; "to throw in"]) and insignia have 
a representative rather than a noetic and spiritual character; the parable, 
the metaphor, and the allegory only partially possess the character of sym- 
bol. In the allegory something different is said (JxXko-ayopEVoy [alio- 
agoreyo; "to speak other'*!) rather than what is really meant. The literal 
sense is the "beautiful lie," and the true sense is another, possibly in con- 
trast with the literal meaning. In the symbol there is no contrast or true 
difference between what appears at first sight and what is meant. Between 
the symbol and its meanings there is usually a relation of harmony, anal- 
ogy and correspondence. It is not a matter, as in the case of the allegory, of 
perceiving the true meaning without being misled by the apparent and 
irrelevant meaning, but rather (as far as mere comprehension is concerned) 
to go back from the evident meaning to the hidden ones, in order to under- 
stand the full meaning of the symbol, thus fulfilling (instead of overcom- 
ing) the initial meaning. Moreover, and properly so, the allegory is always 



86 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

verbal; this limitation does not apply to symbols, since there are many 
types besides the verbal ones. 

The parable too does not have the value of symbol. This word [from 
rocpapo^f| (para-bol£) and napa-flakX® (para-ballo), "to put things next 
to each another")] is a mere comparison or similitude. Parables cannot 
lead beyond the term of comparison. Their successful employment by 
Menenius Agrippa and by Jesus shows that they are useful for plebeians 
and for the profane masses. As far as the metaphor and the tropos (meta- 
phorical impression) are concerned, which are terms properly employed 
in rhetoric, we should note that they too refer to verbal expressions. They 
suggest that it is usually necessary to translate from concrete into abstract 
terms the meaning of words or phrases used in a metaphorical way. Meta- 
phor (Latin trans-latum, "the carried over") means "to carry away" [pexa- 
cpepco (meta-fero); Latin trans-fero] or "to transfer elsewhere." 

Thus the allegory, the parable, and the metaphor are not, properly speak- 
ing, symbols: they are figures of speech that can deal with symbols, as they 
often do; in this case the characters of the argument, or of the symbol, are 
found, at least partially, even in the verbal expression used. In this case, on 
the basis of a symbol or a body of symbols, or special symbolism, one can 
construct an entire allegorical language; thus, sometimes even a jargon or 
a secret and conventional set of sentences are constructed. 

I have mentioned that symbols come in a great variety of species. In 
practice, anything can constitute the basis of a symbol; however, there are 
obviously criteria for their being chosen or employed. Thus we have nu- 
merical symbolism, in which whole numbers (an abstraction per se) con- 
stitute symbols while their powers (Greek Suv&j^gt^X their residues, or 
roots (7ro9|ifjv), their simple relationships and properties constitute sym- 
bolically their anagogical virtues. This symbolism was especially employed 
by the Pythagoreans, then by Kabbalists and Freemasons. We have the 
symbolism of the letters of the alphabet, which is obviously connected to 
the numerical symbolism that is at the basis of the Kabbalistic tradition. 
We can connect the geometrical symbolism of the Platonists and neo- 
Platonists to these symbols, and especially to the first one. Geometrical 
and numerical symbolism is connected to the symbolism of those sciences 
and sacred arts in which there are relationships, proportions, rhythm ? and 
harmony, such as architecture, chants, music, dance, poetry, and painting 



87 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

(together with the symbolism of colors, etc.). Heraldry and emblematics 
are the emanations, derivations, and applications of these symbols in the 
social and political domain. From physical phenomena come polar, solar, 
and meteorological symbolism, as well as the Hermetic symbolism of trans- 
formation. Biological phenomena provide the symbolism of fermentation, 
putrefaction, and germination of the vegetal seed, as well as sexual sym- 
bolism, the symbolism of metamorphosis and resurrection, and the sym- 
bolism of spiritual foods and beverages (e.g., the Hindu soma; the Mazdean 
haoma; the Hindu amrita; the Greek nectar and ambrosia; the ancient Latin 
anna peremna; the Judeo-Christian "bread" and "wine"). From the various 
forms of human activity come the regal symbolism (Philalethes' royal pal- 
ace; the royal or regal neo-Platonic and Masonic art; via regia; aqua regia; 
the Hermeticists' royal wedding; the symbolism of war, especially the "holy 
war" (Bhagavad Gita); the symbolism of pastures found in both Hermes 
Trismegistus's Pymander and in the Gospels; the symbolism of cultivation 
of the u land" or Georgic symbolism; the symbolism of "navigation 1 ' (Homer, 
Virgil, Dante); the symbolism of the foundation of temples and cities and, 
in general, of "edification" (hence the title of "Pontifex" [builder of bridges] 
attributed to the Roman High Priest) and of "construction," which is the 
foundation of traditional Masonic symbolism, naturally connected with 
architectural symbolism (hence the "Great Architect of the Universe"); the 
symbolism of custody and defense of sacred objects, temples, and lands 
(Knights of the Grail and Knights Templar). Finally, some historical and 
legendary events, at both an individual and a collective level, may become 
the basis of and serve as symbolism (e,g., the Trojan War; Hercules' labors; 
the Argonauts 1 expedition; the life of Jesus). Myths [jii)6o(; (mythos = "what 
is spoken" ; Latin tra-ditio - tradition, custom) ] and fable (fabulare, to speak) 
are just stories; mythology is the story of gods and heroes. Myths are not 
symbols, but can have a symbolic character and become the basis of a 
certain symbolism. Thus, pagan mythology has supplied several symbols 
to Hermeticists, such as Michael Maier and Pernety What 1 have presented 
here is a summary and incomplete list, though it should suffice to give the 
reader an idea of the breadth and variety of symbolism. 




88 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

For those reasons, verbal expression, even in its figurative forms, cannot 
compete with the vital, synthetic nature of symbols. The symbol transcends 
words, and even when we consider it merely as a means to express and 
communicate facts and doctrines, it still has one more advantage over lan- 
guage; words vary in time and space, and they are liable to become worn 
out and undergo variations both in form and meaning and cannot achieve 
the stability and universality of symbols. 

Nevertheless, word and symbol share a fundamental trait, namely the 
metaphorical nature that ties their concrete value to their abstract mean- 
ing. Both presuppose the acknowledgment of a universal unity, correspon- 
dence, and analogy; thus they implicitly admit the human "similitude. 15 I 
said "similitude" and not identity or equality; I admit as a postulate that 
beings, and especially human beings, are similar among themselves from 
both the inner and outer point of view, and that the senses and inner or- 
gans of different people resemble and are equivalent to each other, just as 
the physical senses and organs are. Having acknowledged this, our inner 
experience transcends our individuality, and it can be expressed in words 
and symbols that can be understood by those wiio have an analogous ex- 
perience. Moreover, our inner experience can contribute to induce it in 
those who have not yet experienced it. This is what happens in ordinary 
language in regard to common human experiences; when we talk about 
light, sound, color, we presuppose not only that the sound of our words is 
perceived by those who listen to us (just as we are able to perceive the 
sounds that meet our ear), but also that our experience, expressed through 
our words, is understood by those who hear it, thanks to the comparison 
with a similar experience, known by and shared with those who are listening. 

Universal analogy is at the basis of symbolism and also at the basis of 
metaphorical language; therefore it is likely that symbolism conforms to 
determinate norms, just as the shift from the concrete to the abstract sense 
obeys the rules of semantics. The "Emerald Tablet," attributed by the Her- 
metic tradition to Hermes Trismegistus,^ begins with the solemn affirma- 



46. The text of the "Emei-ald Tablet" was presented first by Jabir ibn Fayyan (Geber), 
who claimed to have received it from the Pythagorean Apollonius of Tyana. (See E.J. 
Holrnyard, "Chemistry in Islam/' Scientia, 1/11 11926]). According to Hermetic tradition, 
quoted by Albertus Magnus (De alchemia), the TabCda Zaradi was found by Alexander the 



89 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

tion of this connection and universal analogy; "Verum sine mendacio, cerium 
et verisimum: quod est in/erius est sicut quod est superius; et quod est superius 
est sicut quod est inferius, ad perpetranda miracula rex unius." (True, without 
falsehood, certain and most true; what is below is like that which is above; 
and what is above is like that which is below, for the accomplishment of 
the miracle of the one thing.) 

There is an analogy between the physical and the metaphysical, be- 
tween exteriority and interiority, and between man and cosmos. Because 
of this, man is potentially God, and the microcosm is potentially a macro- 
cosm. God, the Bible says, created man in his own image and likeness. The 
analogical relationship that connects one thing to another makes from each 
thing the natural symbol of things corresponding to it; hence the concept 
and the use made in magic of the "signaturae rerum" (signatures of things) . 
The similarity between the thing and its symbol, between the object and 
its image, may be direct or inverse. Tn the first case the relationship is 
similar to that existing between a note and its octaves; one ascends from 
the symbol to what is signified through an anagogical transposition. In the 
second case, the relationship is similar to that existing between an object 
and its reflected image; one ascends from the symbol to what is being 
represented through reflection and inversion. It is necessary to take this 
factor into account when interpreting symbols. The two similitudes, more- 
over, are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Thus the solar light, refract- 
ing and reflecting itself in droplets of water, gives rise to the phenomenon 
of two concentric rainbows, in which the colors of the spectrum appear to 
be arranged in an inverted manner, Descartes's theory 7 explains the forma- 
tion of the inner rainbow as the simple reflection of the ray of light, and 
that of the concentric external rainbow as a double reflection. Analogously, 
a double inversion or one repeated an equal number of times brings back 
the second type of symbols to the type of mere transposition. Conversely, 
one might think that in the symbols in which the correspondence occurs 
through transposition, the inversion of the symbol is not. perceived simply 



Great in the sepulcher of Hermes. According to this tradition, after the "Flood 15 Hermes 
found the tablets that the ancient wise men and Enoch had chiseled prior to and in view 
of the deluge, in order to perpetuate the tradition. The Masonic tradition attributes the 
discovery of these tablets to Hermes and Pythagoras. 



90 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

because it is repeated an even number of times. The meteorological phe- 
nomenon of the rainbow, due to the dispersion of the "solar" ray into the 
"waters," thus has the value of a natural symbol of the process of universal 
analogy itself. Just as in pagan mythology Iris was the messenger of the 
gods, the special envoy of Jupiter and Juno , because the rainbow was the 
symbol of the union between heaven and earth, likewise the similitude 
between the procedure of the analogical inversion and the procedure of 
inversion in the optical reflection indicates in the analogy the connection 
uniting heaven and earth, spirit and matter, interiority and exteriority the 
divine and the human. 




The analogical character intrinsic in the symbol confers on it an ambiguity 
and an indetermination of meaning, which on the one hand makes it rich 
and fertile vis-si-vis the precision and the determination of the word, while 
on the other hand it makes its penetration and use less simple and easy 
Even in words, the awareness of the etymological meaning and ties with 
related word-forms allows one to perceive their hidden meaning, and thus 
opens the way to a greater knowledge. But in the case of symbols, the 
analogous process presents a very different breadth and depth. The under- 
standing of a meaning is the step toward the conquest of further meanings 
in collateral and higher domains. In this case, one is not forced to abandon 
the constant overcoming of the mystery of the ultimate roots of language, 
which is unavoidably present at the basis of every etymological analysis. 

By virtue of constant meditation, the symbol ends up being imprinted 
on the mind, and with its constant presence it is always ready to inspire it, 
to suggest to it the analogical relationships that it has with what is, from 
time to time, the object of thought. Independent of references to various 
ideas, the symbol, on the basis of the analogical relationships contained in 
it and also due to its intrinsic syncretism, supplies the mind with elements 
to work on, and fertilizes it, so to speak, by bestowing a creative power 
upon it. In this sense, symbols constitute modes of motion and action, 
factors of endogenesis, that push, guide, and lead to conditions of con- 
sciousness not yet experienced, and thus to an effective, direct, significant 
knowledge. From the hidden meaning found in the signs it is possible in 



91 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

this way to ascend to conscious possession; thus what one gains through 
signs is also a practical teaching. 47 

This fecundating, magical action of the symbol over the mind corre- 
sponds perfectly to the similar action of symbols in politics and religion, 
as everybody can ascertain. Think of the waves of enthusiasm, the heroic 
determination that can be induced in individuals or in the masses through 
a hymn, a flag, a national or political symbol; think of the enthusiasm and 
fanaticism that a religious symbol can provoke , and you will understand 
how in Magic, too, the symbol can have a similar energizing virtue, a simi- 
lar stimulating power, and the virtue of spiritual elevation. There is, how- 
ever, an essential difference. In politics and religion the symbol appeals to 
love of country, to partisan spirit^ to religious faith and prejudice, namely 
only to sentiment that the symbol stirs and manifests. But in esotericism, 
the symbol never appeals to sentiment, but rather to the mind and spirit's 
higher faculties of understanding and creativity. Sentiment, beliefs, theo- 
ries, and any idea of adaptation or subordination to the masses are just 
human elements; it is a mistake to rely on them or to compromise with 
them when trying to rise above the mortal level and to ascend from the 
human to the divine. Magic, and with it all initiatic traditions, is perfectly 
coherent when it replaces the dogmatism of religious and philosophical 
faiths, or the mere representative verbalism of some sciences, with the 
symbolic teaching, or with the spiritual process that, with the help of sym- 
bols, makes inner experiences and conditions understandable, and thereby 
enables the direct perception and comprehension of transcendence. 




This magical use of symbols is typical of Hermetism and of the rituals of 
some organizations that have been partially influenced by it. It grafts itself 
onto the practice of ritual that leads to the fulfillment of the Work, 

The Hermetic tradition states that only one vessel is sufficient to com- 
plete the Work, or at most two (as apparendy happened in Flamels case). 



47. The author makes an untranslatable play on words here in the original. The Italian 
word for teaching is insegnamento, which also literally can be read as in-segna-mento t 
"in-sign-ment." He then remarks, "It is very interesting, both historically and philologi- 
cally, to note how language uses a word with such a meaning to characterize teaching/' 
(Editor's note) 



92 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

This vessel, the "Philosophers'" athanor; needs to be sealed hermetically, 
or, according to Hermetic ritual (the expression "hermetic sealing" has 
remained to this day to designate the corresponding chemical operation), 
in order to be able to operate within it, after isolating it from the outside. 
According to a well-known Hermetic saying, "Visita interiora terrae, 
rectificando invenies occultam lapidem" [Visit the interior of the earth. By 
rectification you will find the hidden stone] (Basil Valentinus, Aurelia occulta 
philosophorum, 2nd ed., 1613; it can also be found earlier in a slightly 
different form). The vessel, the grasale or chalice of the Holy Grail, is in 
fact of "earth"; but "earth," according to an archaic symbolism found in 
many languages, is the human body. Human beings (from humus, "earth") 
are earthly, terrestrial creatures; their body is molded with the mud of the 
earth (see the etymology of Adam), which is their dwelling place (see the 
German term Boden, "ground"; and the English terms body and abode). By 
visiting the inside of this vessel and by rectifying (another technical term 
retained in chemistry to designate the corresponding operation) one finds 
the "Philosophers 7 Stone" 

Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa (1401-1464) says (Opera, Basel, 1563, p. 
632) that the master descends from Jerusalem to the rough mountains of 
the desert in order to cut and shape stones for the holy edifice (the place 
for beholding the gods), and that the soul, chosen as a bride for the son of 
God who dwells in immortality, adapts itself to the transformation sicut 
lapides poliuntur (as stones are polished) — that is, as the stones were 
smoothed that were to be employed in building the Temple of Jerusalem in 
which the theophany occurs. This edifying symbolism of Nicholas of Cusa 
corresponds precisely to later Masonic symbolism, in which the workers 
(the "fellows") polish the stones, square them, and form the cubic stone, or 
perfect stone, in the "inner chamber." Dante at the beginning of his De vita 
nova says: "Tnithfully, I declare that the spirit of life resides in the most 
secret chamber of the heart." If the Hermetic vessel and earth are none 
other than the human organism, then the interior of the earth, the "heart" 
of the organism, can only be the heart The heart is the sanctuary or oypt 
of the temple, portrayed as bmeath the ground in the crypt of ancient temples. 
We can understand why an ancient anonymous French alchemist explained 
the name of the Saint Graal with the incorrect, though significant, etymol- 
ogy of sang real, or "royal blood," Such a connection of the vessel with the 



93 

KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 



heart can be traced all the way to ancient Egypt, since the ideogram of the 
heart is a vase with two ear-shaped handles (the ears of the heart); the 
similarity between heart and athanor is interesting, especially when we 
recall the Egyptian origin of the Hermetic tradition. 




We have talked about the descent into the earth's interior. The symbol we 
have employed is so widespread as to go unnoticed. We know very well 
that out consciousness is not an object found inside the body; that there is 
no above or below; that it is absurd to pray to God, lifting one's head to- 
ward a hypothetical "heaven" and putting on the pitiful and beseeching 
expression of a dog waiting for his owner to hand him the leftovers (not 
without the vague fear of a kick). The sinking sensation of the conscious- 
ness in its innermost recesses cannot be expressed in human language 
other than by resorting to analogous sensations of material human life. 
The origin of many important and ancient symbols (if we can talk of ori- 
gins), and thus of their interpretation, is to be found in the need to express 
inner sensations through analogy (an analogy that really exists and that 
the human mind can recognize and employ) between these sensations and 
the sensations of ordinary life. The entire symbolism of the "descent into 
hell" is connected to it. Thus, in Egypt, the subterranean world, the neter 
khert, the dwelling place of the dead, is called "Amenti," from the word 
Amen, meaning "invisible, occult." Thus, the Greek Hades is likewise 
aeior|5, invisible. It is necessary to descend into this underground, invis- 
ible world, illumined by the hidden sun or Amen-Ra, the ''Midnight Sun" 
of the Isaic initiation. This descent must be made without losing self-con- 
sciousness, without drinking or feeling the lethal effects of Lethe's waters. 
On the contrary, one should drink from the fresh source of Mnemosine, 
the giver of immortality in Orphism, or from Dante's waters of the river 
Eunoe. Mnemosine, memory, re-calling (from corda), who is opposed to 
Lethe and conquers him, is the Mother oj the Muses; correspondingly truth 
in Greek is a-htheia, and learning is none other, Platonically speaking, 
than an anamnesis, or a remembering. 

Even the symbolism of the stone, the occultum lapidem, that is found by 
rectifying the interior (or inferior, as it is written in the later variations of 



94 
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 

the Renaissance Hermeticist Basilius Valentinus, and now we can under- 
stand why), derives (though not chronologically) from an inner sensation. 
This at least appears very likely. Although an initial and uncertain sensa- 
tion of sinking into the inner recesses of consciousness is easily accessible, 
in order to reach the sensation of "petrification" it usually needs a long 
period of assiduous practice of the ritual. An Italian text of the sixteenth 
century entitled The Practice oj Philosophical Ecstasy, perhaps by 
Campanella, and published by D'Ancona alongside his work (Turin, 1854, 
vol. I, p. cccxxiii), says that at a certain stage of practice one becomes "as 
still as a plant or a stone/" This confirms how spontaneous and exact the 
comparison of reaching such a condition is to the recovery of the stone. 
According to the Rosicrucian Michael Maier, the Philosophers' Stone is 
the very stone that Cybele forced Saturn to swallow, in order to save Jupi- 
ter, Saturn's own son, from his father's voracity; thus Jupiter was able to 
escape from time and become king of Olympus. The "black stone," a sym- 
bol of Cybele, was taken to Rome and preserved on the Palatine by the 
Romans, who had owned and venerated another "lapis niger" for centuries 
in the Forum, at the beginning of the "via sacra" (sacred road). This stone 
had fallen from the sky and was called "abadir" by the Romans and tt betyl n 
by the Greeks. According to Rene Guenon (Le roi clu monde, 1958, p. 76), 
the word "betyF is the same as "Beth-el," "house of God, 1? which is the 
name given by Jacob to the stone that he used as a pillow when he saw the 
house of God and the gate of heaven in his famous dream. It was also the 
name given by Jacob to the city near the place where he had his dream. 
Interestingly according to Genesis the original name of that city was Luz. 
But luz in Hebrew is the name of an indestructible little bone to which the 
soul is connected after death until the day of "resurrection." Luz is also the 
name of the almond tree. Near the city of Luz there was an almond tree, at 
the base of which there was a hole through which one could access an 
underground passage that led to the city of Luz, completely hidden. Thus 
we return to the symbol of the underground passage, which was associ- 
ated with the symbol of the stone. The entire symbolism of the "spiritual 
building" employed in the Gospel and typical of Masonry, as well as the 
symbolism of the "Philosophers' Stone/ 1 is a development of this funda- 
mental symbol that cannot be understood (nor taught) until the "hidden 
stone" has been found. 



95 

KNOWLEDGE OF THE SYMBOL 




We have seen that we are dealing with a lapis niger (black stone). We could 
make further observations and comparisons concerning the importance of 
black stones in ancient Rome, in the Muslim tradition and in the tradition 
of Agartha, the subterranean world mentioned by Saint- Yves d"A1veydre in 
his Mission de Vlnde, by Ossendowski in his famous Beasts, Men and Gods, 
and by Guenon in his Rot du monde. The fact that this hidden stone, which 
can be found by descending to the "infernals" or in the "dark kingdoms" 
underneath and within the "earth," is necessarily black may simply seem 
the logical consequence in the development of this symbolism. However, 
if we recall how much it may be connected to the full flowering and fruit- 
fulness of the symbolism, it seems to us that even this symbol may have a 
specific reference to the sensation of the Hermetic black, blacker than black. 
We should not forget that the "hidden stone" is the Stone of the Philoso- 
phers and not the philosophic stone; in other words, it is the matter em- 
ployed in the work, and not the matter of the work's perfection; when the 
stone is found, the sensation of "petrification" goes together with the sen- 
sation of utter blackness. 

Once this condition has been attained, the understanding of the sym- 
bol becomes effective; from it the sense of the further symbolism is illumi- 
nated, thus being able to suggest what needs to be done and to lead to a 
further phase in the work. The identification of the references and the 
determination of the symbol, besides, are not left only to the mind's eye- 
As one proceeds, the inner voice (the "voice of the heart") and the inner 
ear (the "ears of the heart") are activated. Thus, hermetically and literally 
the transmission of the symbolism takes place. At certain times this voice 
answers a question that the mind asks about a given state or sensation; at 
other times it directly intervenes at the right moment and reveals a secret. 
Let us be clear about it: this is not the "voice of conscience," the "categori- 
cal imperative," or similar eruptions of what Nietzsche called "petty mo- 
rality," nor mediumistic voices or phenomena. These are inner senses to 
which people usually pay no attention, since they are deafened by external 
noises and unable to perceive and to distinguish the subtle inner impres- 
sions. We can truly say with Jesus: "oculos habcnt et non vident, aures et non 



96 
KNOWLEDGE OE THE SYMBOL 

audiunC (They have eyes and see not, ears and hear not). This inner voice 
and hearing can work during both the waking state and sleep, as well as in 
the various stages of consciousness attained during the practice of the rite. 
Simultaneously with their action, sometimes real, tangible phenomena 
occur, such as to dispel any skepticism. These phenomena often possess a 
manifest symbolic character, and sometimes display an incomparable beauty 
and nobility We could relate some examples, but we have hinted at this 
topic only in order to mention facts that are impossible to confuse with 
ideas or hallucinations, as one might be inclined to believe in the case of 
inner voices and perceptions; we have also hinted at this topic in order to 
suggest that the symbolic character extends to these manifestations as well. 
The symbolism is innate in them, too, so as to become a sort of universal or 
initiatic language, which finds one correspondence and expression in the 
initiatic language (through signs, gestures, or "universal words") employed 
by some organizations more or less connected to the initiatic tradition. 



Apafhanatismos 

(Deification) 

Mithraic Ritual of the 
"Great Magical Papyrus of Paris" 

Translated from the Greek by Luce 
Introduction and commentary by Ea, Leo, Luce, P. Negri 



Introduction 



T h 



he text — presented here in the first Italian translation from the original 
Greek, and which we have compared with the German version by A. 
Dieterich (Fine Mithrasliturgie, Leipzig, 1903) and the English version by 
G. R. S. Mead (A Mithraic Ritual, London, Benares, 1907) — is found in the 
Great Magical Papyrus of Paris (No. 574 of the Supplement grec dc la 
BibliothequeNationale. For variant readings, cf. Wessely in the J ahresbericht 
des kk. Staats gymnasiums Hernals, 1899, p 12ff., as well as N. Novossadsky, 
Ad papyrum magicum bibl. Parisinae not. additiones paleographicae, Peters- 
burg, 1895). 

In this text we have the only ritual of the ancient Mysteries that has 
been preserved in its entirety through the centuries, in a redaction dating 
to the beginning of the fourth century C.E. The tradition to which it is 
connected is essentially Mithraic, namely an adaptation of that ancient 
Aryan-Persian tradition which, for a while during the decline of ancient 
Rome, contended with Christianity for the spiritual legacy of the West. In 
the text, together with elements of Mithraic theurgy, we find intermingled 
elements of Egyptian-Gnostic magical traditions, particularly in reference 
to the many "names of power" that appear in it This does not prevent the 
fact that, notwithstanding various strictly philological or historical con- 
siderations, the text represents a unity in which these various elements 
complete each other, for the practical realization of the ritual itself. 

This Mithraic ritual has a very special meaning. It was not a ceremony 
attended by many people (hence, the inadequacy of the term "liturgy" 



99 
APATHANATISMOS 

employed by Dieterich), but rather an individual operation aimed at the 
transformation of the deepest nature of man, and apparently reserved to 
those who had already gone through the lower degrees of initiation. The 
character of the ritual is not purely interior, nor magical in the sense of 
ordinary ceremonial magic. It is not purely interior, because, unlike the 
path of Hindu yoga and also what remains of Hermetic-alchemical sym- 
bolism, it does not deal with metaphysical states and meanings to be per- 
ceived directly, in their unspoken and formless essence. Rather, these mean- 
ings are first given as invocatory and ritual actions, then projected into 
magical images and visualizations. However, the context of ceremonial 
magic in the strict sense is transcended, since there is no exterior relation- 
ship with the apparitions. They are not exploited for some particular pur- 
pose, but rather everything converges toward a transcendent realization of 
the self. Therefore this has something intermediate: a common trait, after 
all, of everything that falls in the realm of theurgy, We also notice that the 
experiences described or indicated in the ritual do not seem to take place 
outside the body, nor in the ordinary bodily conditions, but rather in a 
special state offluidic intoxication well known to those who practice magic, 
in which the contact established with the "Astral Light 51 and the conse- 
quent release from everything that comes from the animal senses do not 
prevent one from remaining in touch with the physical body and carrying 
out particular ritual actions. Thus, in the text, the references to the various 
apparitions are given together with logoV 8 (which are not necessarily pro- 
nounced only in the mind), and with real physical actions, such as closing 
the eyes, breathing, pressing one's abdomen, and so on. In this regard, it is 
interesting that the Mithraic ritual confirms that the science of breathing 
and of particular bodily postures (asanas) is not limited to Hindu Yoga, 
but was known even in the ancient Mysteries of the West, especially in 
Egypt, from which survives a text in hieroglyphics called the Booh of Breath- 
ing. The same applies to the science and the use of "names of power," 
which correspond to the mantras and bijas of the esoteric Hindu tradition. 
By closely following this Ritual, we can reconstruct the unfolding of the 
path followed by the Mithraic initiate. 



48. "Invocations," plural of logos, (Editor's note) 



100 
APATHANATISMOS 

First of all, it is necessary to become detached from the "law of the 
waters, 15 from desire, or the burning, unending need that afflicts men who 
are tied to their inferior and mortal natures, Tn the first logos, the Mithraic 
initiate, just like the Orphic initiate, declares his own title of nobility — 
being His son, still mortal, but sanctified by the "Strong Strength of all 
Strengths" and by the "incorruptible Right Hand. 15 He invokes his tran- 
scendent reality, namely his "Perfect Body 1 ' From the corruptible elements 
that constitute the animal nature, the invocation rises to their essence and 
to the primordial, heavenly, incorruptible elements. The operator resists 
and subsists: he holds firm and in "purity' 1 fixes the power of his own soul 
beneath him. He then sets himself to unchain the force and to open the 
"mystical eye" to the transcendent vision. Having realized the moment of 
"purity," a contact is established through the breath with the element of 
air, in view of the first transformation: the experience oj Air (a state of 
disembodied lightness) or of a diffuse spiritual sensibility, free from the bonds 
of the physical senses. The experience of Air is followed by the experience 
of the Wind, which is the principle that moves the supersensible ether and 
allows one to climb up to the causes, or to the initial hierarchy of "beings" 
or "Gods." Here the initiate holds his ground against the forces that at- 
tempt to sweep him away and resolves the tension caused by his appear- 
ance through the invocation of Silence, in other words, by putting himself 
in the state of calmness, the deeper being-in-oneself. When the vision clari- 
fies, he proceeds. 

The "thunder" mentioned in the second instruction may be regarded 
as a passage through one of the so-called "points of indifference" (layabindu, 
in a corresponding Sanskrit expression), with an ensuing sudden change 
of state. In fact, from the second logos we learn that the initiate assumes 
the way of being proper to the very Gods of this order; the cyclical view is 
revealed to him, in which he creatively perceives the sidereal essences fill- 
ing the ethereal space. The experience ends with the vision of an immense 
"wheel" and of closed "fiery doors," which signify universal "Necessity." 
This vision is too much to bear, due to a sense of loss that the initiate tries 
to overcome with wonderful elan in the third logos of the Ritual. In this 
logos, the state corresponding to the "Lord of Necessity," the "Prince of 
Fire," or the "Dominator of the Wheel" is invoked, aroused through its 



101 
APATHANATISMOS 

"Names/' attracted and fixed. What follows is a further transformation or 
change of state: "Silence" gives new strength to the soul, and the heavenly 
world appears liberated, clarified, no longer subject to fate, but rather in 
the overshadowing of the superior principle, transparent as a world of 
Gods, producing exaltation and ecstasy. The invocation continues. At first, 
what is outlined is the experience of a new "central 55 way of being, proper 
to this world. What follows is the apparition or projection of the Solar 
God. The following ritual puts the initiate in contact with the elementary 
cosmic power, with the primordial nature of the KOa^ioq tcov Becov (world 
of the gods). The Solar God leads to the "Pole," to the "midpoint" or "base 
point," This point needs to be "fixed," while at the same time, by "bellow- 
ing," the primordial Amnionic and taurine strength, or the "Strength of 
Strengths," is awakened. This brings about a second opening of "doors' 1 
and an ensuing emergence from the depths of the septenary hierarchy 
This hierarchy is first experienced in its "feminine," manifested, and dy- 
namic aspect, and then in the further masculine, unmanifested, unchang- 
ing aspect. 

Nor does action of the ritual end here. This very hierarchy is tran- 
scended, and through a further deepening and fixation (which may corre- 
spond to the passage to the Ogdoad [the highest plane] mentioned by 
Gnostics), the nature of Mithras himself is actualized. Mithras is he who 
assumes and dominates the taurine, cosmic force that carries and moves 
all things. After being experienced in a magical projection or image, this 
supreme principle, in a second phase, is directly realized. The Mithraic 
nature, evoked and mastered through a new "bellowing," is "fixed" by the 
initiate. He commands it to remain, for the perfection of the state of him 
who is free from necessity birth, and death. In many parts of the text there 
are sentences that are uncertain or susceptible to different interpretations. 
While keeping within the limits of philological correctness, we have tried 
to present a comprehensible and coherent translation, insofar as with this 
publication we have not endeavored to make a contribution to secular 
philology, but rather to shed some light on the phenomenology of the 
mysteriosophic experience. 



102 
APATHANATISMOS 

TEXT 

%pt[ ovv at, di 8i3yaT£p, ^ajapdvsiv xuta>i)q 
Poxavcov [i[e]X6vTtt>v aoi £v too ieXgi zox> 

kpcu jj,oo cvvi:ay\xaToq 

I 

Propitiation Formula 

Be favorable to me, O Providence and Fortune, as I write these first mysteries 
to be transmitted to the only Son, who will be rendered immortal, to the Ini- 
tiate worthy of this Power oj ours. The great Sun God Mithras ordered me to 
transmit these mysteries through his own Archangel. Be favorable to me, so 
that I alone, the Eagle, may reach the Heavens and contemplate all things, 

II 

Invocatory Logos 

First origin of my origin, AEEIOYO; Beginning of my beginning, PPP 000 
PHR; Spirit of the spirit, of the first breath in me, M M M; Fire, that God has 
given in the mixture of the mixtures in me, first fire in the fire of me EYEIAEE; 
Water of the water in me, first Water of the water in me, OOOAAAEEE; 
first earthly essence of the earthly essence in me, Y£Y6E; Perfect Body of me — 
born ofN, (name) ofN. (mother) — that the honored Arm and incorruptible 
Right Hand have formed in the dark and transparent world, inanimate body 
that was animated, YliIAYI EYOlE! 

If you deem it Tight, though I am still held back by my inferior nature, 
allow me to attain the Immortal Birth, so that, having overcome the incessant 
need that holds me in its terrible grip, I may contemplate the immortal Prin- 
ciple through the immortal Breath ANCHREPHRENESUPHIRINCH, through 
immortal Water ERONOY1PARAKOYNETH, through the Earth and the Air 
EIOAEPSENABOTH; so that I may be reborn to the intelligence KRAOCH- 
AXRO; so that I may give to myself a new beginning and breathe in me the 
Holy Breath, NECHTHEN APO TOY NECHTH1NARP1ETH; so that I may 
contemplate the abyss of the East, the horrible Water, NYL) THEGQ ECHO 



103 
APATHANAJISMOS 

OYOCHIECHOA and the vivifying Ether spread all around me may hear me, 
ARNOMETHPH;for I, a mortal man bom of a mortal womb, being now made 
better by the strength of the highest Strength and by the incorruptible Right 
Hand — today I want to behold with an immortal eye and with imperishable 
Breath the immortal Aeon, the Lord of the Fiery Crowns. 

Having been purified by sacred ceremonies, as the human strength of my 
soul endured in a pure state for a brief time, I will receive it again beyond the 
insistent and urgent need that oppresses me> which no lament can ever dispel 
This is what I, N. (name), bom ofN. (mother), want according to the unshak- 
able order of God, EYEYIAE£lA6ElANIYAIIEd> 

However, since it would not be possible for me, a mere mortal, to rise to- 
gether with the golden effulgence of immortal splendor, I command to you OEY 
AEO EYA EOE YAE OlAE. Be still, O mortal nature destined to perish, and 
allow me to go beyond the inexorable, hard-pressing need. For I am the Son, I 
breathe MOYOPROCHO PROA, I am MOY PRO— by breathing PRdE, I am! 

Ill 

First Instruction 

Breathe from the solar rays, inhaling three times as deeply as you can, and 
you will see yourself rise up, above every height, and you will feel as though 
suspended in midair. 

You will no longer hear any sound coming from a person or a living 
being; you will no longer see any mortal thing of the earth; but all the 
things you see will be immortal 

You will see the divine order of the proper day and of the hour; you will 
see the Gods who rise tow T ard heaven, others descending from it, and you 
will see the course of the visible Gods through the Disk of my Father — God. 

You will see the so-called Flute, in an analogous way which is the begin- 
ning of the Wind at the service of the Great Work, You will see something like 
a flute hanging out of the disk, in the direction where the heavenly currents 
begin, as an infinite wind from the east. But if the other wind, blowing 
eastward, should appear to you, you will see it as the opposite of what is seen. 

And you will also see the Gods staring at you and acting as if they were 
ready to assail you. At that time, place the right finger over your mouth 
and say: 



104 

APATHANATISMOS 

IV 
First Logos 

Silence Silence Silence 

Symbol of the incorruptible living God, protect me o Silence NEKTHEIR- 
THANMELY! 

Then hiss for a long time: S! S! Then exhale and say: 
PROPROFENGE MORIOS PROPHYR PROPHENGE NEMETHIRE AKP- 
SENTEN TITE TMIMEOYENARTHPHYRKEKOPSYRIDARIOTYREPHILBA ! 
Then you will see the gods looking favorably upon you, no longer act- 
ing as if they were ready to attack you, but going about their own business. 

V 

Second Instruction 

When you see the higher cosmos free and all illuminated, and no aggres- 
sive behavior on the part of the Gods and Angels, expect to hear a great 
crash like thunder, such that you will remain stunned. But say again: 

VI 

Second Logos 

Silence! Silence! 
I am a star that journeys with you and shines from the abyss 

OXYOXERTHUTH! 

Immediately after saying this, the solar disk will suddenly begin to expand. 
And after you have recited this second logos — namely the word "Si- 
lence" twice and everything else — hiss twice and blow twice and straight- 
away you will see many five-pointed stars coming out of the solar disk, 
quickly filling the entire space. Then say again: 

Silence! Silence! 

And when the Disk opens up, you will see an immense wheel and fiery 
locked doors. Closing your eyes, recite rapidly the following logos: 



105 
APATHANAT1SMOS 

VII 
Third Logos 

Listen and hearme — N. (name), son ofN. (mother) — Lord who has closed 
to the spirit the fiery doors of heaven! You, who have a double body, you who 
dwellinFirePENPTERUNI, Creator of Light, keeper of the Keys SEMESILAM, 
burning breath PSYRINEY, soul of Fire IA0, breath of Light AOl,joy of Fire 
AILURE, beautiful Light AZAIAlONNACHBA; you, Lord of Light 
PEPPERPREPEMPIPI, whose body is FirePHMUENIOK, giver of Light, spread- 
ing Fire AKEIEICHITA, sparking Fires GALLABALBA; you who in Light have 
life AIAlO and are the power of Fire PYRIKIBOOSEIA; you who move the 
Light SANKEROB and unleash the Thunderbolts OEIOElO, glory of Light. 
BAIEGENN&TE, giver of Light SUSINEPHI, you who preside over the heav- 
enly Light SUSINEPHI ARENBARAZEI MARMARENTEY, leader of the stars! 
Open the door to me PROPROPUENGE EMETHEIRE MORIOMO- 
TYREPHILBA! Because of the bitter and urgent need that presses me on, I invoke 
your venerable immortal living Names, those that never descended into a mortal 
nature, which were never expressed in any mortal human language or voice! 

eeO oeeO iOO oe £e6 eeO oeeO iOO oee£ 0£e Ooe ie e0 oo 
OE IEO OE Ooe ieOoe ieeO ee iO oe ioe OeO eoe oe6 Oie 
OIEEO 01 III eoe Oeu eO oee eOeia aeaeea eeee eee fee ieO 
eeO oeeeoe eeO EYO OE Eld Ed 6e 6e D£ ee oooyioe 

Say all this with fire and spirit from beginning to end, and then a sec- 
ond time, and so on until you have realized the seven immortal Gods of 
the cosmos. 

Having said all this, you will hear thunder and the upheaval of every- 
thing that surrounds you; then you will feel deeply shaken. Once again say 
"Silence" with the following invocation. 

After this, open your eyes and you will see the doors open and the 
world of the gods that is within them; and for the joy and pleasure of the 
sight, your spirit leaps and rises up. 

Then, staying still, breathe in the divine, staring unflinchingly within 
your spirit. 

When your soul is restored, say: 



106 

APATHANATISMOS 

VIII 

Fourth Logos 

Come, O Lord 

ARKANDARA PHOTAZA PYR1PHOTAZA BYTHIX 
ETIMENNEROPHORATHENERIE 

PROTHRJPHORATHI 

Having said this, the solar rays will converge on you. You will become 
their center. When this is fulfilled in you, you will see a young handsome 
God, with fiery hair, wearing a white tunic and a scarlet mantle, with a 
fiery crown on his head. 

Greet him straightaway with the greeting of Fire: 

IX 

Fifth Logos 

Hail, Lord, strong and powerful, most influential King, highest of all the 
Gods; Sun, Lord of Heaven and Earth, God of Gods, powerful is your breath, 
mighty is your strength. Lord, if it so please you, announce me to the highest 
God who has begotten and produced you, since a man asks to worship you, as 
far as a human can, I am N. (name), son ofN. (mother), born of the mortal 
womb of N. and of sperm, and I have been regenerated by you. I have been 
rendered immortal among myriads of beings at this moment, thanks to God's 
will that transcends all goodness. 

As soon as you have said this, He will take you to the Pole and you will 
see him as if on a road. Then, staring at him intently, emit a prolonged 
bellowing, sounding like a horn, expel all of your breath, pressing simulta- 
neously on your ribs, kiss the amulets, and say toward your right: 

X 

Sixth Logos 

Protect me, PROSYMERI 



107 
APATHANATISMOS 

Having said this, you will see the doors open and seven virgins arise 
from the depths, with serpent faces. These are the dominating Fates, golden 
arbiters of the Heavens, At this sight, greet them in this fashion: 

Greetings, o seven heaven!)/ goddesses of Destiny (oi5pavoi3T\>XAO, noble 
Virgins, kind and holy, whose lives are as MJNIMIRROPHOR; you, most sa- 
cred guardians of the four columns: 

Hail to you, the first KREPSENTHAES! 

Hail to you, the second MENESKEES! 

Hail to you, the third MEKRAN! 

Hail to you, the fourth ARARMAK&S! 

Hail to you, the fifth EKOMM1E! 

Hail to you, the sixth TIKNONDAES! 

Hail to you, the seventh ERUROMBRIES! 

XI 

Seventh Logos 

Then seven Gods will come forward, with the faces of black bulls, wearing 
linen around the loins, wearing seven golden crowns. These are the so- 
called Lords of the heavenly Pole, whom you also must welcome, greeting 
each one with his proper name; 

Hail, Guardians of the Pivot, you sacred and strong youths who at com- 
mand turn together the Axis of the Heavenly Wheel and hurl thunder and 
thunderbolts, earthquakes and lightning against the race of the impious. How- 
ever, grant me, as I love Good and venerate God, bodily health, perfect intellect 
(lit. "sight 71 or "vision"), steady gaze, and calmness during these good hours 
of this day, O my Lords and great powerful Gods! 

Hail to you, the first AIERdNTHI! 

Hail to you, the second MERKEIMEROS! 

Hail to you, the third AKRIKIUR! 

Hail to you, the fourth MESARGILT0! 

Hail to you, the fifth KJRROALITHO! 



108 
APAJHANAT1SMOS 

Hail to you, the sixth. ERMIKTHATH0PS! 

Hail to you, the seventh EORAS1KE! 

When they place themselves here and there according to their order, look 
intently at the air and you will see lightning and bright lights; the earth will 
shudder and a God will descend, an immense, radiant presence. He is young, 
with golden hair, wearing a white tunic, a golden crown, and a long robe 
(anaxurides), holding in his right hand the golden shoulder of the Calf. 

This is the Bear who moves and turns the heavens, high or low, accord- 
ing to the seasons. 

Then you will see lightning come forth from his eyes, and stars from his body 

At that precise moment, emit a long bellowing by pressing on your 
stomach so that all five senses may be stirred; prolong this to the end and, 
kissing your amulets, again say: 

XII 

Eighth Logos 

You, MOKRIMOPHERIMOPHERER1ZON of mine— N. (name), born of 
N. (mother) — stay with me in my soul. Do not depart from me, since 1 
command to you ENTHOPHENENTHROPlOTH. 

Stare intently at the God, bellowing for a long time, and then greet him 
in this fashion; 

XIII 

Ninth Logos 

Hail, Lord, Master of the Waters; hail, Origin of the Earth; hail Sovereign of 
the Spirit! 

Lord, in palingenesis I die in an integrated state, and in integration I have 
achieved the fulfillment 

Bom of animal birth, having beat liberated I am transported beyond mor- 
tal generation, 

As you have established, 

As you have decreed, 

As you have done, Great Mystery! 



109 

APATHANATISMOS 



CORRESPONDENCES 4 ^: 



CO = 


yy = ng 


r\ = e 


yK = nk 


e = th 


ou = u 


v = y 


♦ = P h 


% = ch 


K = k 


Comi 


mentary 




i 



We could associate "Providence" and "Fortune" (pronoia feat tyche), which 
are invoked in the propitiation formula, with the Kvartnd, namely the "Glory" 
or "Heavenly Fire" that according to the ancient Persian tradition is thought 
to descend from above in order to consecrate kings, priests, and conquer- 
ors. Hence, in the same formula, its relation with the power of initiation 
and consecration that the invocator declares to have already received; thus 
he can turn to the next achievement and rise from the rank of "Son" to that 
of "Eagle," according to the ritual given in the text. 

In any event, Pronoia is one of the epithets of Athena, the goddess of 
Wisdom, who, as a result of her infinite knowledge, has also the power 10 
foresee future events; thus, she can bestow opportune knowledge so that 
nothing may disturb the outcome of the sacred operation. Tych& is the 
equivalent of the Roman goddess Fortuna, who is usually portrayed with 
wings, leaning on a sphere or wheel, which are the emblems of her speed. 
Sometimes Tyche is also veiled, to indicate that she goes her way without 
following any human criterion. The invocation of the two goddesses sug- 
gests that the neophyte, in his attempt to achieve immortality not only 
invokes Fortune (namely the unpredictable and instantaneous power that 



49. The chart of correspondences was provided to assist readers in following how Luce 
transliterated the invocatory Greek words of the ritual into the Roman alphabet, 
particularly with regard to the seven Greek vowels. The usage of the vowels is mentioned 
in section 11 of the Commentary on the ritual. (Editor's note) 



110 
APATHANATISMOS 

plays such a role in magical operations), but also the wisdom necessary to 
recognize the "gifts" and to assume them at the proper time, (Another 
reading gives psyche instead of tycht. In that case the initiate would invoke 
not only all of his intellectual faculties, but the soul itself, or psychi with 
all of its infinite capabilities; in other words, the whole life source in him.) 
More generally, the word tycht, understood as "destiny," may suggest the 
"fatal" aspect of the entire process. "Son" should be understood here as 
"Son of the Art" and also as "born according to power," due to the double 
meaning of the word dynamis, which in the Gnostic-Christian literature 
includes the meanings of salvifie power, miracle, sacrament (e.g., Romans 
1:16; Matthew 7:22; Mark 6:5; II Corinthians 12:12). As such, the term 
"son" must refer to the subject of the Mysterion, in regard to the "Father," 
the one who in the initiatory act transmits to the neophyte the principle or 
potential of awakening. At the end of the ritual, we shall see that this force 
reveals the very nature of Mithras: the initiate must get hold of it and fix it 
in himself, thus becoming in turn, with this act, a center and a "Father," 
which is the highest rank in the hierarchy of these Mysteries. The "Father" 
is the fulfillment of the "Eagle," the bird capable not only of taking off 
from the "earth" and flying in the "air" (according to what is found in the 
first instruction) but also to stare at the Sun, according to the law of Mithras, 
conqueror of the Sun. 

In this regard, we agree with Dieterich and Mead that the expression 
"Sun-Mithras" is a gloss of an ignorant scribe, since in this tradition Mithras 
is not the Sun God, but one who becomes his ally and ambassador only 
after defeating him. In the ancient Western tradition the Eagle was the 
"bird" sacred to Jupiter: it was portrayed with a sheaf of red thunderbolts 
in its claws (the white thunderbolts came from Minerva; the black ones 
from Vulcan — and the student of Hermetic sciences might find references 
to the three main "colors" of the "matter" of the Work), The eagle is the 
symbol of strength and of the sovereign power. It was the ensign of impe- 
rial Rome and of its legions, and also the symbol of cities, especially in 
Egypt, where its hieroglyph indicated Heliopolis (the "City of the Sun"). 
As far as Jupiter s iconography is concerned, we may note in passing that 
the Supreme God is portrayed in a sitting position, to suggest that the 
highest power presiding over the universe is stable and steady and that it 
never changes (cf. the symbolism of the "Pole," discussed later). The na- 



Ill 

APATHANAT1SM0S 

ked torso of the God indicates that he manifests himself to the divine intel- 
ligences; his lower half, being covered, represents what is unknown to man. 
One more reference. In the Hermetic treatise "The Virgin of the World" Isis 
declares that the sovereignty of Wisdom is in the hands of Harnabeshinis, 
a name that Prietschmann transcribed as "Hor neb en Xenrnt" (Gold, Lord 
of Xennu); its hieroglyph is precisely a golden eagle that flies close to the 
Sun, staring at it without blinking. 

The expression paradota mysUria, in which mysterion has the meaning 
of initiatory act, leads us from Mithraism to the general doctrine of traditio 
(tradition) and of tradere (to hand down) on the basis of a "presence." 
This presence was known in Kabbalah as the Shekinah; in the Arabic tradi- 
tions as Bardka, or blessing; and in this case the same as the pronoia kai 
tyche or Hvareno that is first invoked by the theurgist. We have mentioned 
this doctrine, common to all the Mysteries of antiquity in chapter Til, in 
relation to the Tantric text published there. (Cf, Lobeck, Aglaophamus, no. 
39 in the bibliography; and for the meaning, A. Reghini, E, C. Agrippa e la 
suaMagia, Milan, 1926.) Compare the propitiatory formula found in the 
text with that given in the magical ritual of Peter of Abano (Heptameron, 
XI); "My heavenly Father, let me know today if 1, a sinner, am allowed as 
your unworthy son, to display the arm of your power against these very 
obstinate spirits, so that if you will, 1 may be enlightened with every wis- 
dom, and ever glorify and adore your Name." 

II 

In the first logos the theurgist evokes from the depths of his being the 
sensation of the "perfect body,* 1 or "complete body" (soma teleion), which 
is like the "act" of the various "elements" that in their dark and corruptible 
form constitute his animal body. This "body" is formed by the "world of 
Light and Darkness, of Life and Death"; in other words, it is drawn from 
things that, being subject to becoming, "are and are not," and this occurs 
through the "power of the Right Hand." This name of initiatic power, which 
we have already mentioned, effects the "change according to substance" 
that is conceived, also in Gnosticism, Hermetism, and neo-Platonism, as 
an integration, a rectification, a fixing, and a straightening. The. manner of 
the "elements," as they are found in man's physical body is oblique, curved, 



112 

APAJHANAT1SM0S 

weak, dark, evanescent; it is the world of shadows and corpses. The essen- 
tial virile virtue of the "Right Hand" (the "Hand of Power," since in He- 
brew and in Arabic jod 3 or "hand," also means power) and of "Justice," 
fixes these elements; it activates them, arouses them, makes them alive. 

At that moment, the law of homeopathy sets in. According to an initiatic 
teaching, in every organ of a complete human body, there lies as though 
chained a form of cosmic sensibility; this constitutes a way to communicate 
"according to substance" with the corresponding elements of the superior 
and interior world. In the invocatory logos, the theurgist tries to stir his 
consciousness in this "direction" and toward this cosmic relationship, for 
it is only on its basis that the ritual or magical act can produce an effect 
(see the essay by Leo in chapter I). The doctrine of the "Perfect Body" has 
correspondences in many other traditions: we may recall here St. PauFs 
"spiritual body"; the augoeides, or "radiant body" mentioned by Plotinus 
and Olympiodorus; the vajra~kdya ? or "body of the diamond-thunderbolt, 7 ' 
of Tibetan Tantricism (Vajra-y&na). This "body" is a "resurrection body" 
and a "magical body" In Agrippa (De Occulta Philosophia, III, 44) it is 
written; "In the w r hole world there is nothing so admirable, so excellent, 
so miraculous, that the human soul carrying in its constitution the image 
of the divinity, which the magicians call a soul that stands without falling, 
cannot do by its own virtue and without any external help." The technical 
expression "standing, not falling," which is traditional and was used in the 
earliest times, refers to the above-mentioned "strengthening" through the 
"power of the right hand." In the Corpus Hermeticum, Tat, the "Son of the 
Art," tells his Master, Hermes-Thoth: "O Father, having been strengthened 
by God, I do not contemplate with the eyes, but with the intellectual en- 
ergy of the powers," The term used is a-klin£s, "made stable, unyielding." 
From here we can refer to the term sahu that was the ancient designation 
for the body through w T hich the deceased was confirmed in immortality. In 
Egyptian, aha means "to stand up, to face something"; when we add the 
prefix s-, which in that language forms causative verbs, we have saha (to 
cause something to stand up, to carry upward, to straighten). In the an- 
cient Egyptian language the deceased was also called kherit, namely he 
w T ho has fallen. It was only in virtue of the sahu formed by the ritual that 
immortality was granted to him. Moreover, the name itself of the Hermetic 
interlocutor Tat, means "stability" in Egyptian; the hieroglyph that corre- 



113 

APATHANATISMOS 

sponds to its pronunciation is the nilometer, namely the trunk of the tama- 
risk on which, according to tradition, the body of the slain Osiris came to 
rest before his resurrection. In Greek an-isttmi and ana-stasis have the same 
meaning as the Egyptian sahu; these terms arc employed by Herodotus 
and even by Homer in the sense of rising from death. The initiatic power 
causes the fallen one to rise up again, turning him (through the "perfect" 
or "rectified" body) from a "shadow" and a "corpse" into a Living Being. In 
the name of the transcendent reality evoked in one's body, the theurgist 
seeks extinction of cravings through a "birth that is free from death," the 
extinction of "necessity." The idea of anankfc is found in the most ancient 
Hellenic mysteriosophy, and it corresponds to the Hindu karma and to the 
Buddhist tanha, Anankfe refers to the deep irrational yearning by which a 
being is precipitated into a physical life, and to that yearning which, from 
a state of "being-in-oneself," leads to the state of "ex-istence," namely of 
"being outside," 

According to a special and more technical aspect, "necessity" and the 
"burning, ceaseless yearning 1 ' mentioned several times in the text may re- 
fer to a characteristic experience that occurs in many people, as soon as 
with the first disciplines they succeed (whether they know it or not) in 
touching and setting in motion something in the subterranean zone of 
their being. This experience is like an organic, absolute, and unending 
hunger, generating an incomparable anguish and dissatisfaction. It searches 
around, seeking satisfaction by turning to this or that object, becoming 
identified with this or that human tendency or desire, starting with physi- 
cal hunger, all the way to the spasms of a passion such as that described in 
Tristan and Isolde. This is a vain attempt, because it is a hunger that cannot 
be satisfied by anything earthly or human. It desperately enhances every 
type of sensation, while nevertheless remaining insufficient; thus, what 
remains is a sort of consuming yearning for the void. Then, to die may 
appear as a supreme joy and the only object adequate for the desire (e.g., 
muero porque non muero [I die because I do not die], uttered by St. Theresa 
of Avila; we find the same situation in the hymn to darkness and death as 
the supreme fulfillment of love in Tristan). There is almost an obscure 
intuition that death and night hide something that can extinguish this 
nameless thirst, as which also comes into question in Orphism (cf. the 
Hymns to the Night of Novalis, and A, Onofri, Guido al Tristano e Isotta, 



114 
APATHANATISMOS 

Milan, 1924). We could mention more than one person for whom suicide 
became the epilogue of such an awakening, provoked without adequate 
control and enlightened consciousness. This particular interpretation of 
the "need" and "necessity" mentioned by the theurgist is supported by the 
fact that we are dealing here with a ritual of the Greater Mysteries. This 
ritual presupposes preliminary practices that might have induced the ex- 
act experience in question — that which can be fulfilled only in death: ei- 
ther in teleisthai, that death which is life or initiatic resurrection; or else in 
teleutan, real death, in which case telos does not mean the fulfillment but 
the end, the extinction of the brief light of individual consciousness. 

Being a slave of "necessity" (anankt), man is passively led by the "cur- 
rent/' according to a law that the initiate attempts to break. Therefore, he 
needs to fix the power of his human soul, to suspend it and to keep it 
firmly under control, through the higher power he has received — only- 
then the bond will be removed. Through the change of state, his "anguish" 
will dissolve. The Self will breathe the "cosmic air" that is the ether of 
liberty and liberation, a being-in-no-place, and a freshness made of imma- 
terial activity This "cosmic air" is the "ether of life" or "ether of the Liv- 
ing," echoing in a spiritual form of sound, in syllables of clarity and en- 
lightenment. These syllables in the ancient Egyptian tradition are the so- 
called "names of power"; they are also the mantras of Hinduism and the 
'Tetters of light" of the Kabbalah. Aristides, in regard to the Eleusinian 
Mysteries, said that one would experience there the most horrible and the 
most wonderful things; the scariest (phri hodestaton) and the most serene 
(phaidrotaton) feelings that divine things have to offer to men (Bus., 256). 
Likewise, in this Mithraic ritual, mention is made of the "Wonder of Fire," 
the "Horror of the Waters" (the "Waters that make one shudder"), and the 
"Abysses of the Source." We may recall that these experiences refer to the 
Greater Mysteries, reserved for those who have been strengthened through 
previous trials, thus being able to overcome the terror, confusion, and rap- 
ture that they would cause in most people. The text mentions a protective 
measure: the immediate invocation or evocation of "Silence" — the state of 
silence that was spoken of before. The "immortal eye" is the "third eye } " 
the "frontal eye," the "cyclopean" or "solar" eye; it is the eye of spiritual 
vision. The initiatic literature abounds with references to it. Not only can 



115 
APATHANATISMOS 

this eye stare at the Aion, but also things are revealed to it that the "purify- 
ing fire" strips of their particular and sensible character. We have men- 
tioned its correspondence with the "eye of Shiva," which in turn alludes to 
the frontal pearl found in images of the Buddha. 

The statement made in this logos, that the power of the human soul 
must be restored beyond the state of "necessity," confirms the view that 
initiation is not a mystical shipwreck, but rather an integration: an inte- 
gration into a state that is superior to, and which preceded, the conditions 
of inferior form and existence. 

The invocation of the first logos is filled with voces mysticae (mystical 
words). We have already spoken of them; they are words that, employed in 
a special state of fluidic exaltation, have the power to arouse and to evoke — 
they are almost "absolute expressions," or gestures of power that project 
the meanings with which the remaining words are charged. In order to be 
efficacious, these words need to be "awakened." The theurgic "enthusi- 
asm" must "set them alight" and "unlock" them until they erupt almost 
spontaneously in the evocations. In these "words" we should notice the 
presence of the seven Greek vowels, which probably correspond in their 
order to the seven planets and the seven degrees of the magical hierarchy 
(more on which later) echoing a very widespread symbolism. 

Ill 

We have said that the first instruction concerns a realization of the "air" 
element, obtained through breath. This presupposes a knowledge of the 
Science of Breathing in the sense of the Hindu prana, a magical life-energy 
enclosed within material breathing. The three inspirations probably refer 
to three depths of breath, inwardly pervaded by an elan that eventually 
transforms consciousness into the "airy state." The first vision of the Gods 
that ensues is a supersensible projection, made possible by such a state. In 
this state, once one has become free of the yoke of physical sensation, in 
the transparency of the solar Eye or Disk, what sleeps in the buried interi- 
ority of man can be known in the guise of images. 

In regard to the Gods who travel up and down, we are immediately 
reminded of Jacob's ladder and of the Telesma, which, according to the 
"Emerald Tablet," rises from the earth toward heaven and then descends 



116 
APATHANATISMOS 

back to earth, carrying with itself the power of the higher and lower things. 
These two streams of energy move the cosmic air in conformity to the 
modulation that the "flute" bestows on the "wind 17 ; they manifest the One 
Force, to a different and antagonistic degree, according to whether one 
takes as a reference the East (the symbol of rising, growth, and generation) 
or the West (the symbol of decay and passing away). If this leads us back 
to the opposition found in the so-called "Great Magical Agent," we are 
also inclined to connect to it the meaning of the two mysterious 
"Dadophoroi" (torch bearers), often found on Mithraic monuments, one 
carrying his torch upright, and the other holding it toward the ground. 
Moreover, this is not the first time that we encounter the "Wind" in 
Mithraism, While Hermetism believes that the wind carries in its womb 
the Telesma, or the "father of all things," in other Mithraic monuments 
(e.g., in the bas-relief of Modena — see E Cumont, Les Mysteres de Mithra, 
Brussels, 1913, p. 109) the wind blows over the Aion from four sides; here 
the Aion finds itself between two halves of an "egg" (a symbol closely 
related to that of the alchemical athanor). 

In the reconstruction of the myth by E Cumont (ibid., p. 133) we find 
again the "Wind" scourging Mithras's "nakedness," after he emerges from 
the "stone," on the edge of the "waters." Mithras belongs to the type of 
those who do violence to the "tree." Having ripped leaves from it to create 
a protective "garment," and having eaten its fruits, he turns to measure 
himself against the lords of the wonderful world in which he has entered 
and who had witnessed "from the mountaintops" his miraculous birth 
from the "stone." All these symbols are clear enough for the student of 
esoteric symbols. According to J. Evola's interpretation 50 the "wind" is re- 
lated to the initial experience of the cosmic power that invests the initiate at 
the precise moment he becomes free of the physical bonds. The initiate needs 
to reaffirm himself over this force with a projection of the positive fire that 
attracts a descent of the feminine cosmic power This force will cover the 
nucleus of the initiate with a "garment of power" or of "flame," which will 
then become his supersensible body. In this ritual we find almost the same 
thing, since the initiate to the Mysterion lives as his own realization the 



50, J, Evola, The Path of Enlightenment in the Mithraic Mysteries, trans. G. Stucco 
(Edmonds, Wash.: Alexandrian Press, 1994). 



117 

APATHANAT1SM0S 

meanings enclosed in the myth. However, the experience of the "wind" is 
followed by that of the Gods in the act of falling upon the newcomer, as 
they are the enemies of those who try to release themselves from their 
control and to identify themselves with the s\ipreme principle. 

IV 

The invocation of this principle, together with "Silence," allows the theurgist 
to pass the test and to transform the influences of the Gods into something 
good; they are now left behind, "going about their own affairs," left behind 
in their own laws. This "silence" that resolves the tension recalls the paue, 
pane (be still, be still) of a Naasene Gnostic fragment; "The same Man, the 
Phrygians call also Papas, because he set at rest all things which had been 
moved irregularly and discordantly before his coming. For the name Pa- 
pas is the synthetic sound of all things in heaven, on earth and below the 
earth, saying L Be still, be still' (pane paue) to the discord of the cosmos. The 
Phrygians also call him the 'corpse' when he is buried in the (material) 
body as in a tomb; and after the transformation, God." (Hippolytus V, I, 
21-22) 

The gesture of putting a finger on the lips recalls the famous figure of 
the god Harpocrates (see Apuleius, Metamorphoses, 1), who in the Egyp- 
tian tradition expresses a form of the rising Sun, a personification of Horus 
the Young, namely of the original force that rises again and reasserts itself 
after Osiris has been cut to pieces (the symbol of the process of individua- 
tion). Once this force awakens and leaves the "sepulcher," it imposes si- 
lence on chaos and on the turmoil of the elementary nature that is still 
untamed. Philalethes (Inlroilus ad occlusum regis palatium, VI, XI) talks 
about certain impurities of the "air"; the formation of "clouds" that darken 
the sky and need to be dispelled until the whiteness of the Moon is dis- 
cernible; and of abundant rains that need to be produced to restore to the 
Air its serenity. Most likely this alludes to the same experience. The en- 
counter with the guardians of heavenly doors and their overcoming through 
magical formulas is also found in Gnostic texts, e.g., in the one given by 
Dieterich (p. 35 n.) "Go back laldabaoth and Kuro, archons of the third 
aeon, since I invoke ZUZEZAZ ZAOZUZ KOZOZ, Then the archons of the 
third aeon will leave and flee, to the West, to the left, and you will ascend.'" 



118 
APATHANATISMOS 

The hissing is found in Peter of Abano's Heptameron: it is followed by "great 
upheavals" and the apparition of entities that at first seem to assail the 
operator who stands within the magical circle and who, after he displays 
to them "Solomon's Seal," assume a peaceful posture and obey him. 

VI 

The initiate's declaration of his own sidereal dignity is often found in the 
mysteriosophic literature. It is also reaffirmed in the Orphic laminae, be- 
fore the guardians of Mnemosine*s spring: "My lineage is heavenly (e|ioi 
y£voc; otipritviov), as you well know. I am burning and consumed with 
thirst." "I am the son of Earth and starry Heaven. My lineage is heavenly:" 
(Lam. Petelia) "I belong to your blessed stock. But Moira and the thunder 
struck me down, drying me up." (Lam. Thitrii, II) 

In our ritual the declaration seems to have a determinative sense, es- 
tablishing commonality with the heavenly natures into whose circles one 
has ventured. What ensues is the solar vision, represented by the "Disk." 
The "hissing" and "blowing" are most likely related to the practice of breath. 
We may even compare this with the so-called "purification of the nadis" 
(nadishudda), consisting of an expiration (hissing), broken down in small 
segments, and acted upon mentally so as to expel the turbid and impure 
elements of the fluidic body and to actualize all of its "currents." This 
action, in the text, comes after the "thunder" (I have already mentioned 
the thunder that causes Dante, in his otherworldly journey to "pass out" — 
Inferno, III, 130ff<)» an d it seems to confirm a certain steadiness among the 
turmoil of the inner elements produced by the thunder itself. The solar 
vision has an identifying character: it takes place in a space that is con- 
sciousness itself, in its immaterial simplicity As far as the five-pointed star 
is concerned, we could interpret it as a vision of human beings, whose 
"Number" is five. In that case, the immense wheel is the Wheel of Genera- 
tion, the Wheel of Destiny and of Necessity, corresponding to the Hindu 
samsdra. Compare this with one of the recurrent sayings of the Buddhist 
Majjhima-nik&jo: "With a heavenly, clear, and otherworldly eye he sees 
beings appear and disappear, vulgar and noble, beautiful and ugly, happy 
and unhappy — he clearly sees how beings continuously reappear accord- 
ing to their actions." The counterpart of the necessity that rules over earthly 



119 
APATHANATISMOS 

affairs is the barring of the heavenly doors; it is not possible to go beyond, 
unless this horrible vision, which permeated the most ancient Hellas, is 
overcome. This can be done by neutralizing the confusion of the human 
nature by invoking the Lord of Fire. 

VII 

This invocation is one of the most beautiful and powerful to be found in 
this type of literature. There is indeed an occult rhythm that connects the 
various attributes with the nomina arcana (hidden names) and drives them 
forward with increasing exaltation, culminating in the series of divine 
names. Here the expression seems released from articulation, vibrating in 
the form of pure acts. The text says that the logos must be repeated until 
the seven gods art fulfilled, namely realized, sculptured in the inner light. 
Finally after a new "Silence" in which one becomes free and "fixes" the 
impetus of the evocation, the "doors" open up (the "thunder" and "pre- 
cipitation" mark the new change of state, or the new "fall of potential," to 
use a physical image), the Gods appear, and consciousness is transported 
above, among them. The "Names," says the text, must be pronounced "in 
Fire and Spirit" — in the Hermetic conjunction of Solar and Lunar; Mer- 
cury and Sulfur; dry golden masculine strength and fluidic, humid femi- 
nine breath; and with sufficient "direction of efficacy." The various attributes 
must act upon the evocator's spirit like pieces of kindling, which are thrown 
into the fire to produce an ever stronger flame. 

VIII 

1 have mentioned already that the invocation is both one and sevenfold. It 
is addressed to the seven planetary Gods and to the One, to the solar Aion 
who is their root, comprehending and transcending them, In fact, it is this 
Aion who is invoked by the new logos and who appears after the septenary 
hierarchy of Gods and Goddesses. 

The Aion holding the heavenly keys is without a doubt the Mithraic 
Chronos. The epithet "Thou double-bodied" is also found in the Mithraic 
monuments, in which this being is portrayed with the head of a lion with 
open jaws (symbol of devouring Fire), and a human body It also has wings, 
and a snake is wound around its body (cf. the "Serpent kundalini" in Tantric 



120 
APATHANATISMOS 

symbolism, wrapped around the Svayamku-linga [phallus] of Shiva, the 
principle of transcendent virility) and holds its head on the middle of Aioivs 
brow (another reference to the "place" of the cyclopean eye). Aion holds 
in one hand the thunderbolt and in the other a key (or, in some images, a 
scepter). Its feet tread upon the lunar symbol, just as in the alchemists' 
symbol of "Rebis" (also a "double symbol," and hermaphroditic) and in 
that of the "Virgin," the esoteric meaning of which has been totally lost 
among Christians. Like the Phoenix, this Aion grows out of fire. 

IX 

In the space of the fourth logos, while the mode of centrality is being formed 
(the rays take the initiate as the center of convergence) , Mithras's messen- 
ger appears. In the following logos, the fifth, there are various noteworthy 
points. It is confirmed, first of all, that the "Sun" here is not the highest 
deity. I have already said that Mithras, instead of being subjected to the 
divine strength (as happened in the Hebrew myth to Adam, who likewise 
took from the "tree," and to other brave men mentioned in the same Orphic 
laminae, who were struck down and incinerated by lightning), overcomes 
it and makes this victory his warrant for an alliance with the Sun. 

We next notice the expression concerning the Juice of Life, of the sperm 
that, having created the animal body of the initiate, undergoes a transfor- 
mation in the ritual. It seems that what is hinted at here is the doctrine of 
the occult regeneration of sexual power, or of the "conversion of the Wa- 
ters flowing below, into Waters flowing above. 1 ' Not only is this highly 
secret operation alluded to in the evocation, but it also seems that the 
ritual mentions its practical execution in the course of the theurgic action. 
We refer here to the part after the fifth logos, where mention is made of the 
solar God who goes to the "Pole," to the "Support,' 1 and then proceeds: 
where mention is made of a "bellowing" and a complete expiration. We 
may recall that in Kundalini Yoga, the "place" of kundalini (which in its 
dormant form is said to be none other than man's generative power) — of 
that kundalini which is the cosmic Fire, the serpentine Power encircling 
the body of the Mithraic Aion } and also effigies of masculine deities in the 
Syrian cults of Isis — is called miiladhara, meaning "radical support," an 
idea that corresponds to that of a "pole" or "pivot" The theurgist is led to 



121 
APAJUANATISMOS 

the root of his being, to the muladhara, and thus to the awakening of the 
"fire" of kundalini by the solar principle actualized in himself. Bellowing 
(Mo) may be a mantra of awakening; thus the comparison with the mantra 
OM (made by Mead) and with the HUM in Tantric texts employed for 
these practices seems well founded when we consider the "reversal' 1 un- 
dergone by verbal expressions in their "subtle" usage. To exhale one's en- 
tire breath, articulating the act by bellowing, reminds us of one of the main 
teachings of Kundalini Yoga, in which the kumbhaka (the suspension of 
breath that has completely been exhaled or completely retained) is said to 
create a propitious state for the awakening of kundalini. In any event, there 
is no doubt that bellowing is connected to the "taurine power," the cre- 
ative, masculine, and Ammonic force. Outside of Mithraism, bellowing is 
also found in the Thracian rites of Dionysus. Dieterich, following the studies 
of Andrew Lang (Custom and Myth, 43), relates it to the so-called "bull- 
roarer." This is an instrument found in the ceremonies of various primitive 
peoples in New Mexico, Australia, Africa, and New Zealand; it produces a 
sort of rumbling or bellowing that evokes the God or announces his ar- 
rival. No woman can see this instrument without dying. Thus the esoteric 
interpretation may be this: the taurine power bums and destroys tire "woman 
in the Self," such that he who awakes it without first establishing himself in 
the hard and dry nature of the "Iron of the Wise" ends in catastrophe. 

Concerning bellowing, we may note these interesting verses of an ec- 
static shaman hymn: "The mighty bull has bellowed! The horse of the 
steppe has shuddered! I am above all of you, 1 am a man! I am endowed 
with all things! 1 am the man created by the Lord of the Infinite!" (M. 
Eliade, Le chamanisme et les techniques archaiques de Vextase, Paris, 1951, 
p. 210) A special technical meaning is found in the injunction to stare at 
the solar God, once he, after reaching the "Pole," proceeds along the "path." 
This path, if the parallel we are drawing is correct, could be the path fol- 
lowed by the fire of kundalini and the place from which — shifting to Far 
Eastern symbolism — the "Dragon" will take off. The act of "staring" would 
then express an absolute and yet immaterial endurance while being car- 
ried off in such a "flight." Without this capacity of endurance, the opera- 
tion may have the lethal result we have mentioned. In Agrippa we read: 
"There is in man's body a certain little bone, which the Hebrews call luz, 
which is incorruptible, neither it is overcome by fire, but is always preserved 



122 
APATHANATISMOS 

unhurt, out of which (they say) as a plant out of a seed, our human body 
will regrow at the resurrection of the dead. And these virtues are not de- 
clared by reasoning, but by experience. 5 * (De Occulta Philosophic I, 20) In 
Aramaic, luz is the name of the bone attached to the lower extremity of the 
sacral bone, at the base of the spinal cord. This is precisely the location of 
muladhara, according to Hindu teachings, and the seat of kundalini. 
Kundalini is said to regenerate the body since it draws out of the "sepul- 
cher" in which the mystical "Papas" lies — the Dead One mentioned in the 
Naasene fragment — the "perfect body" of our ritual 

In the previous chapter it was said that Luz, in the Pentateuch (Genesis 
28), was the ancient name of the city of Bethel ("House of God"). It was 
near this city that Jacob had his famous dream. As he woke up he ex- 
claimed; "Surely the Lord is in this place and 1 knew it not," then, seized 
by fear, he added: "How dreadful is this place! This is none other but the 
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven." Now the muladhara, in the 
Hindu tradition, is called none other than "Brahman's threshold." There 
are also numerous references from Hermetic alchemy. We again cite 
Philalethes (Ibid., IV); "This center (of the "magnet") naturally turns to- 
ward the Pole, in which the virtue of our Steel is fortified by degrees. And 
in this Pole is found the heart of our Mercury, which is a true fire in which 
rests its Lord — and sailing across this great Sea, he will go even to the two 
Indies." Moreover, it is said that at the entrance of a "cave" near Luz (which 
can be related to the Hermetic symbols of the "mine," "Mercury's cave," 
and the cave of Trophonius, and well as reflected in a materialized form in 
the various prehistoric "cave-cults") there was an almond tree with a hole 
in the trunk, through which one could find the path to a "city," so thor- 
oughly hidden that the "angel of Death" could not enter in or have any 
power over it (Jewish Encyclopedia, vol 8, p. 219). If anyone should take 
the trouble to look through a Tantric text (Shiva-Candra, in the Tantravatta, 
III, 2nd ed.), he might be surprised to find an almost identical allegory in 
regard to the secret ritual of Yoga. The "Pole," which supports the solar 
principle, "our Gold," could be the subject of important symbolic consid- 
erations. In the Far Eastern tradition it corresponds to the "invariable pivot" 
from which Heavens activity is manifested. In many other traditions we 
find the "Polar Mountain," where the entrance to the Land of the Living is 
to be found. At this point, we touch on a new order of ideas; from the 



123 
<\PATHANAT1$M0S 

doctrine of the secret art we are led again to that of the invisible kingdom 
and of the "King of the World/' concerning which we refer the reader to 
the book of the same name by Ren£ Guenon, 

X-XI 

In regard to all this, and to the following phases of the ritual where one 
encounters the seven gods and seven goddesses, we now turn to a charac- 
teristic Hellenic myth. Already, thanks to what has been said so far, one 
can begin to appreciate the degree to which traditional myths and legends 
are not the product of sheer fantasy, but rather contain initiatic teachings 
in coded language. This is the myth that portrays Hermes and Apollo in 
the act of exchanging the Caduceus and the seven-stringed lyre. Apollo is 
the solar god, and also the very apparition following the fourth logos. He is 
the god who first goes to the "Pole" and then proceeds along the path, to 
the point of which he is "fixed" and the bellowing occurs, announcing the 
awakening of the primordial force. In regard to the technique of this "awak- 
ening," I have mentioned the suspension of breath, which would be one of 
the methods of combining two currents of subtle energy (solar and lunar). 
In ordinary people these currents are distinct and wind in a serpentine 
fashion along the two sides of an ideal line running through the body. This 
line begins at the top of the head and goes all the way down to the sacral 
bone, roughly following the spinal cord — just like the two snakes of the 
Hermetic Caduceus, wound around the central staff (see A. Avalon, The 
Serpent Pov^er, Madras, 1924). The caduceus of the myth expresses this 
arrangement, which brings forth a third, central axis (the staff of the cadu- 
ceus), to be traveled by kundalini. On this inner axis, the so-called chakras 
or energy centers are awakened and illuminated. They correspond both in 
number and meaning to the sevenfold hierarchy: to the seven planets, the 
seven gods, the seven strings of the lyre, the seven spheres, the seven spi- 
rals of the snake carried by the Phrygian deity and by the Mithraic Aion, 
etc. Thus with the Hermetic composition of the Caduceus, the initiate ob- 
tains from the solar principle (Apollo) the access to that "Royal Path" on 
which, being carried by the taurine power that "opens" the doors to him, he 
realizes the experience of transcendent states that constitute the immaterial 
hierarchy of the Hebdomad and the symbolical "Land of the Living/ 1 



124 
APATHANATISMOS 

This realization has two phases: first seven virgins appear, and then seven 
gods. Referring again to Hindu teaching, in each of the seven chakras there 
is a sleeping god (deva) and a goddess (devi), which must be understood as 
the masculine and the feminine aspects of corresponding metaphysical 
powers. I have already mentioned that "feminine" aspect is the manifested 
one, dynamic, active, immanent, and demiurgic; it is the aspect of shakti, 
or of power; the substrate of existing things insofar as they exist. The "vir- 
ginity" of the goddesses expresses being, or such power, at a pure state 
(not yet subject to the law of duality of Self and non-Self proper to the 
physical world). However, their purely demiurgic character is confirmed 
by their epithets of "guardians of the four Foundations" and "Goddesses of 
Destiny" Conversely, the masculine aspect represents what is transcen- 
dent, detached, immutable. This aspect, according to a symbolism found 
in many traditions, is aptly represented by the color black, in contradis- 
tinction to the "light" that begins where the manifestation, the expression, 
the 7rp6o5oc; begins, incapable of assuming the primordial creative power, 
whose nature is shared by the black bull-faced gods. Thus, these are the 
"supports," or the centers of the seven centers; as the text says, the spin- 
ning of the heavenly wheels proceeds from them, referring to the "ter- 
tiary" rather than the "quaternary 11 order. Thus the ritual alludes to visions 
in which the cosmic septenary is first experienced in its immanent aspect, 
then in its transcendent aspect; first, in its aspect of "passive perfection" 
(the yin of Chinese tradition), and then in its aspect of "active perfection" 
(the yang) and of "foundation." 

We may recall here a celebrated passage from Apuleius: "1 came to the 
boundary of death, and having trodden the threshold of Proserpina, 1 trav- 
eled through all the elements and returned to earth. In the middle of the 
night I saw the sun flashing with bright light. 1 came face to face with the 
gods below and the gods above and paid reverence to them face to face" 
{Metamorphoses, XI, 23). The correspondence of these phases with the 
itinerary already described in the Mithraic ritual is quite evident. But the 
true fulfillment is beyond these experiences. The initiate gradually wrests 
himself free from the orbits of the gods and of the planets, moving beyond 
them. It is an ascent corresponding to a simplification, to an anXcboiq, to 
use Plotinus's expression. In each of the spheres, the soul becomes free 
from those various "passional" elements in virtue of which it was sub- 



125 

APATHANATISMOS 

jected, in its mortal life, to the Lords of these spheres, until it remains 
totally naked, "clothed only in its own power/ 5 as it is said in the Corpus 
Hermeticum. In the Mithraic text, the various overcomings appear to have 
been given in function of a greeting to each of the gods, mixed together 
with voices that may have the character of both chrism and spell. The text 
does not directly reveal the dramatic character that these experiences must 
have when the initiate attempts to transcend the various cosmic hierar- 
chies by identifying himself with them, unfaltering, enduring, and pre- 
serving himself, and when he awakens in their own "ascendant" direction 
a strength stronger than their own, using which he passes to the immedi- 
ately higher levels of the hierarchy. The ritual leads to the "state beyond 
the seven/ 1 where, with a rumbling of the earth that resembles "thunder" 
(we may recall the thunder sound of the "Gigantic Man" seen from a "high 
mountain 1 ' mentioned in T\\e Gospel of Eve (in Epiphanius, Haereses, XXVI, 
3), there takes place the encounter of the initiate with Mithras. 

The taurine energy (as calf) is again indicated through the symbol of 
the "Bear" as the central cosmic power, around which the motion of all 
things gravitates. Mithras is its ruler. He is portrayed in various monu- 
ments in the act of carrying a calf's shoulder, thus suggesting his quality of 
"bull-slayer." And the taurobolium, in this tradition, has the value of a 
rebirth into eternity (cf. N. Turchi, Le re\\g. misteriosofiche del mondo antico, 
Rome, 1923, p, 192). The Mithraic doctrine considers the passage of the 
spirit beyond the seven spheres as what we might call a transcendent 
taurobolium. Nor should we omit the observation that the Bear constella- 
tion, referred in the text to Mithras, gives an overall impression of a cart 
with yoked oxen; and the "North" (Latin septentrio) that it points to may 
be rendered as septem-tnones — i.e., according to Virgil's use of the term, as 
"seven oxen." This would lead us right back to what rules the seven gods 
portrayed with "black" bull-faces. In regard to the instruction at the end of 
the seventh logos, we have said that it refers to the glorification of the ini- 
tiate in Mithras's own nature; to the realization of Mithras's quality to be 
actualized in a supreme assumption of the taurine power that has already 
opened to him the heavenly gates. It is now necessary to operate the same 
transformation on this power, portrayed in the symbol or ritual of the 
taurobolium. 



126 
APATHANATfSMOS 

XII 

In the penultimate logos, the theurgist fixes this realization in his own soul. 
This is the "digestion" of Mithras's nature, by command. We find here a 
new witness to the eagle's nature of the initiate, who stares intently at the 
magical image of the Great God, while in the "bellowing" resounds the 
threat of that strength that has already been assumed. 

An analogous invocation, of Egyptian origin, is found in another Greek 
magical papyrus (A. Dieterich, Abraxas, Leipzig, 1891, 195, 4ff.): "May 
you dwell in my mind and in my heart all the days of my life, and fulfill 
everything my soul desires! For you are me and I am you. Whatever I say 
shall be so for ever, for I have your Name (in a magical sense, that is, your 
'presence') as guardian in my 'heart. 1 " 

XIII 

The fulfillment of the work is crowned by the final formula of "Hail" to the 
god of the Ritual, who has performed the Mystery of Transformation. The 
epithet "Lord of the Waters' 1 reveals a significance that should already be 
familiar to the reader. That of "Lord of the spirit," which finds an exact 
counterpart in the Corpus Hermeticum, is proper of the "magical" assump- 
tions of the initiatic tradition. Here the higher value is not to be spirit, but 
Lord of the spirit. The "regeneration" of the initiate is his integration, his 
fulfillment, his awakening to that life, next to which the dark, craving- 
filled life of mortals is nothing but death, This is an awakening to a life that 
is "life in itself and "of itself* (afoo^toov), an incorruptible life. Liber- 
ated in this Life, the initiate proceeds along the "way" (the unnamable Tao 
of Far Eastern tradition); rather he is this very Life, since, according to a 
Sufi saying, "On God's Road, the traveler, the journey, and the path on 
which he walks are one and the same." From "sacred consecrations," from 
the "Strong strength of all strengths/ 5 and from the "incorruptible Right 
Hand," picked out of the mass of the "dead" and made worthy of initia- 
tion, the initiate, the "Son" of Tradition and of Art, rises in the ritual of the 
Greater Mysteries to the power of the "Eagle," surpassing every height up 
to the peak at which echoes the formula of the Egyptian Book of the Dead: 
"I am Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow and the Power or Rebirth. I Know 
the Abysses: that is my name." 



127 
APATHANATiSMOS 

Magical Appendix to the Ritual 51 

(1) 

"I am PHEROYRA MIURL* 

After you have said these things, you will immediately be able to proph- 
esy You will be free in spirit and outside yourself, when he (the God) 
answers you. He will speak the oracle to you as maxims, and while he 
speaks he will be visible. But you remain silent. 

You will be able to comprehend all these matters by yourself, then you 
will remember indelibly the things spoken by the great God, even if the 
oracle contained thousands of maxims. 

(id 

If you wish the teaching to be given to a fellow-initiate, you may do this, 
providing that he alone may hear with you the things spoken; let him remain 
chaste together with you for seven days in isolation, also breathing the fluid. 

(in) 

And even if you were alone in this operation, and undertook the things 
spoken by the God, you would speak as though prophesying in ecstasy. 

(IV) 

And if you should wish to teach someone, first judge whether he is com- 
pletely worthy as a man; then if the God has prophesied in favor of him, 
that he might make himself immortal, confide the first invocation to him, 
but not the essential part: "First origin of my origin, etc," 

Right after this, as you are already an initiate, say the rest of the invoca- 
tion over his head, in a low voice, so that he may not hear it, and conse- 
crate his vision that he may achieve the mystery. 

This consecration to immorality takes place three times a year, 
But if anyone, O son, wishes to hear the God through instruction gives 
to another, he will not be granted it, 



51 . This appendix follows immediately after the ritual in the papyrus, but is very likely 
attributable to a different editor than that of the text iiself. We quote here the most 
important part of it, translated for the first time from the Greek. 



128 
APATHANATISMOS 

(V) 

If you want to teach someone else, take the juice of the herb called 
"kentritis," and smear it with rose petals on his eyes; and he wil! see so 
clearly that he will amaze you. 

(VI) 

I have not found a greater ritual act than this in all the world. 
Ask the God for what you want, and he will give to you. 
This is the nature of the Great God. 

(VII) 

Many times I have used the ritual, and have wondered greatly But the God 
said to me: "I do not need the consecration, but can prophesy as through a 
raging river that carries the great mystery of purification, which can be 
restored just as through the ritual by means of twenty-five living birds; 
you may also prophesy once a month, at the full moon, instead of three 
times a year. 



Summary 



B 



>efore further developing the material that we intend to discuss in the 
following essays, it will be helpful to take a look at what we have covered 
so far. 

The first step in initiatic practice is to know that silence and that concen- 
tration treated by Luce in chapter I. There, after explaining the symbols of 
the "waters/ 1 those "Saved from the waters," and the "Lords of the waters," 
the broader meaning of the Opus Magicum was given, which the commen- 
tary to the Mithraic Ritual (chapter IV) has in many respects completed. 

The second phase consists in moving the sense of self from the head to 
the heart, or from a reflected to an organic and central consciousness (see 
chapter II). Then the possibility opens of establishing contact with the 
subtle body, for which we have begun to give instructions in chapter 11L 

Just as the material body is the seat of experiences concerning material 
reality, likewise the subtle body is the seat of experiences concerning subtle 
reality, or better, the subtle aspect of reality The experience of this aspect 
is related to that of the so-called signs, sounds, names of things and of 
beings. We have already mentioned this in Luce's Opus Magicum essay in 
chapter III, and in the commentary to the Mithraic Ritual. In this chapter 
we will proceed by explaining a general view of the world as Word and 
Symbol. 

These experiences no longer take place through the physical senses, 
and transcend even the discursive and rational faculties that are essen- 
tially connected to the brain and that draw their matter from the physical 
senses themselves. Having transferred the Self into the heart, the possibil- 
ity is established, in principle, of a knowledge that is no longer indirect, 
reflected, perceptive-discursive, but rather direct or symbolic: the presence 
of things and their influences are perceived in midair, so to speak, before 
they generate reactions, only in function of which they appear as "physical 
things." We have already talked about symbols (see Pietro Negri's essay in 
chapter III) as instruments or supports of a form of knowledge that is no 
longer sensible-discursive, and which is free from the organ of the brain 



131 
SUMMARY 

and is actuated through the subtle senses. Later on, we will discuss the 
various traditions of symbols, such as the alchemical-hermetic one. 

There are various ways to activate the sense of the "subtle body" and to 
facilitate the operations that take it as their basis. In this regard we will 
discuss the use of magical perfumes. In the meantime we wish to integrate 
in this direction the instruction already given in chapter 11, namely the 
contemplation of a sun that rises in the night and sets during the day 
together with the sense that we ourselves ascend and descend a "mountain." 

During the night, something occurs that, if expressed materialistically 
could be compared to a "freeing" or "detachment" of the subtle body from 
the physical body. However, the Self, used as it is to lean on the physical 
body, does not know how to accompany this detachment; thus, the result 
is not the awakening, but the sinking of consciousness into torpor. The 
above-mentioned exercise, if followed with the right intention, operates in 
the sense of creating a predisposition to follow the process consciously 
and to "introduce the Self to the subtle state." 

However, we need to be aware that in the natural state this detachment 
is not complete: the subtle body still maintains a certain connection with 
the physical body that it animates, and the resonance in it of the subcon- 
scious impulses and the processes (both normal and abnormal) of the or- 
ganism creates the world of dreams. It becomes free only in part, and en- 
ters into contact with the supersensible world; but many other possibili- 
ties of knowledge and action that might derive from this are paralyzed, 
due to the subsistence of that partial connection with the life of the or- 
ganic subconscious, responsible for creating ordinary dreams. 

Thus it is necessary to aim at a Jul! and conscious detachment, creating 
a different polarization of the fluidic body in respect to the physical body 
This may be attempted by those who have already obtained some results 
from the previous exercise (e.g., a sense of vague luminosity fluctuating 
during sleep) and have already established a certain contact with the subtle 
body itself, following what has been said in chapter IIL This is what needs 
to be done next. Before falling asleep, after having contemplatively accom- 
panied the sun's ascent to the zenith and one's own ascent to the peak of 
the "mountain" at "high noon," it is necessary to visualize an image of one's 
own body in the exact position in which it is found, tie it to the sense of the 
subtle body, and then imagine a slow movenient of the image, until it reaches 



132 
SUMMARY 

the opposite position. For instance, if the body lies on the left side, imagine 
a slow rotation until you feel it as if it were lying on the right side. After that, 
fall asleep. Due to the power of this practice, it is possible that, in the subtle 
body, even the partial dependence on the organic life will be suspended. 

The condition for the efficacy of this ritual is to go toward sleep with- 
out tiredness, with a calm and serene mind, with an inner desire of eleva- 
tion and illumination, almost with a sense of veneration and trust toward 
the mystery hidden by sleep. The usual attitude with which one heads 
toward sleep, to abandon oneself, relax, and let oneself go in a need for 
physical satisfaction, operates in exactly the opposite way to that aimed at 
by these practices. 

And now, some general principles that we recommend to the serious 
attention of those who practice initiatic disciplines; 

1. Desire, hope, expectations, inexorably lead away from results; 2. All 
of the esoteric exercises are fruitful only when they ate loved and willed 
for their own sake, almost as if they had a purpose in and of themselves; 3. 
The persistent lack of results even after constant and serious efforts may 
be just a test; 4. To find all of this natural is already a result. 



Abraxas 

Instructions for the 
"Awareness of Breath" 



L 



ie down horizontally. 
Relax your body 

1) Realize that if someone were to lift your arm, it would fall back, as 
if it were dead weight. 

2) Realize that if someone were to push your body from where it lies, 
it would tumble around on the earth like an inanimate object. 

3) Realize that you could no longer move your body, even if you 
wanted to: it lies very heavy, inert. Abandon it, no longer concern 
yourself with it. 

With calm and resolve, converge into yourself. Turn toward the thresh- 
old of "silence." After nothing exists but clarity and awareness of con- 
sciousness, come back until you feel the slightest sensation of your body 

You will then notice that your breath, in the meantime, has slowed 
down and is now almost imperceptible. At this point: 

1) Evoke the image of air; a free thing, without origin or cause, 
without bonds, infinite, fleeting, penetrating all things, susceptible 
to sudden variations, without supports (see the essay by Leo in 
chapter II). 

2) Having done this, very slowly reawaken the breath without 
"touching" your body — namely with an act of the mind and not 
with a movement of the muscles. 

If your soul is ripe, it may undergo a Transformation, called Knowledge 
of the Air and also Knowledge ofPrana (pranavidya). 



134 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE "AWARENESS OF BREATH" 

a) The habitual sense of your self in the body will be overthrown. You 
will no longer feel as body and in the body but you will be air, 
space; an air by which you will feel the heavy and inanimate mass 
of the body being carried, moved, and penetrated. 

b) Formerly you felt the air moved by your lungs, namely by an 
activity of the body Now you will find that the air causes the 
lungs to move: it moves the body in the material function of 
breath, and regulates the flow of the blood in it, giving it life. 

c) The function of breath will then be transformed from automatism 
into an act of the living spirit. 

If, after all this, you fix the breath coming and going, it will appear to 
you as light ("The Life was the light of men"; John 1:4). 

If, when proceeding, you penetrate with breath the "frozen, 51 petrified 
sensation of the form or the structure of your immobile body what will 
emerge is the waving perception of a body made of luminous mobility. It is 
the ethereal or fluidic £, as "matter in the white state." 

If, finally after achieving your magical dignification, you fix the breath 
and, as an act of the spirit, focalize it in your lungs, becoming a point 
without dimensions, what will emerge silently, in a new vision, is the Arch- 
angel of Air. 

In the habitual life of everyday, beginning with these experiences, you 
will experience a sense of wonderful physical lightness and of freedom. 

You will be given a natural power of overcoming fatigue and weariness 
that will appear miraculous to others. 

You will also suddenly "see" flashing points in the air. 

In the evening, when getting ready to go to sleep, something like silent 
and luminous explosions may occur in your eyes. 

Observe everything carefully and objectively, and be silent. 

It has been said: "You may practice breathing techniques for decades 
and be very successful at it, but until you actualize prana from your breath- 
ing, and until the breathing process has been dematerialized and given in 
function of the flow of the currents of animated life, all of your efforts will 
be in vain," 



Oso 



Notes on the Logos 



W 



hen in the course of subtle operations, one shifts from the sphere of 
intellectual knowledge (intuslegere, literally "inner reading"), which nec- 
essarily unfolds in Physical Time (the first dimension of "time") through a 
series of logically connected thoughts, to the sphere of the imagination or 
of knowledge acquired through images 52 (imum ago = imago - to act or to 
operate through imum or depth), one then passes from reading what is 
inside one's self to acting upon what is inside one's self. Thus, the practitioner 
enters through spiritual inspiration into the sphere of Duration or psychic 
time (the second dimension of "time"). 

I will not discuss in detail here the third sphere of the operation, in 
which one not only reads and acts upon what is inside oneself, but really is 
cosmic interiority; this domain actualizes itself in Eternity, or causal time 
(the third dimension of "time"). This knowledge can be attained by man 
only in an instant, and it is called spiritual intuition (in Latin intueor - 
intus-eor = I am led within = I am led into - 1 am identifying with = I am 
this or that). In this case one can no longer speak of knowing something, 
but rather of being something. The relative operation consists in transfer- 
ring oneself into other beings. 

For now it suffices to talk about Duration, which is that state of time 
that manifests itself as simultaneity, That which has happened, that which 
is happening, and that which will happen are triply present (obviously in 
the impersonal domain) and weave with their triplicity the true and au- 
thentic space, of which our tri-dimensional space is nothing but the image 
reflected in time. This must be explained further. 

Whenever our eyes or thoughts span over a certain "space, 51 they un- 
avoidably take a certain amount of time, as little as it may be. This is re- 
flected space, or physical space. Conversely, in psychic or soul space, whose 



52. Cf. the essay by Luce in chapter III. 



136 
NOTES ON THE LOGOS 

real name is duration, physical or chronological time either no longer ex- 
ists or is greatly diminished. The series no longer exists, but rather the 
form-image, whose body is woven from time. In other words, what exists 
is the figure, or better, the figures of time. These figures appear to psychic 
sight as beings consisting of a lucent and transparent psychic body (just as 
earthly bodies are woven from opaque and dense matter), These translu- 
cent psychic bodies carry in the inner depths (imum ago) the simultaneous 
activity of "past," "present/' and "future" events, which are the actions 
they have already performed, as well as their current and future actions: 
i.e., the actions of these beings. 

We could say that while the profile or the external contours of these 
images (forms) are of relatively stable brightness (hence their form) > the 
inner lines that transpire from these images on the various planes of their 
various degrees of depth are movement. This movement actualizes and 
manifests itself as sound. It is an inner sound that is perceptible only to an 
absolutely inner ear, which is properly called the "ear of the heart." 

These bright images resound from their interiority-in-motion to vari- 
ous depths of transparency, and these depths are what these images were, 
are, and will be. They speak of time; but they are really speaking at three 
simultaneous "tempi," and this triple temporality resounds synchronously 
in a single inner dynamism that we can only call "becoming." However^ 
their becoming has a threefold scope as well. The unfolding of their own 
essence, resounding in sonorous spheres that spread outwards (first scope), 
encounters other sounds from other figures (or images), which temper 
them, at times harmonizing with them in a polyphonic way, at other times 
interfering with and silencing each other. They are actualized in this (real) 
musical drama, on this plane of simultaneity, both as consonant (harmony 
equilibrium, love) and as dissonant elements (aversion, struggle, war). In 
this reciprocity (second scope of sound) they appear as real actions, in 
which the prevailing of one or another of these images causes the underly- 
ing psychic sound to precipitate into the physical sphere underneath it 
(third scope), thus becoming arrested, so to speak, and fixed as materiality 
in the external world. 

The corpses of this cosmic struggle are the "things" and "beings" that 
we see with our physical eyes. 

All of the objects and forms around us that we are able to perceive with 



137 
NOTES ON THE LOGOS 

our senses are nothing but arrested sounds, dead sounds, words bewitched 
into matter. We can indeed reawaken them in our consciousness, and even 
transform them into living words in our inner sound-world, through re- 
deeming operations of the inner word, which are called mantras, magical 
formulas, mystical voices, or enchanting syllables. fWe must keep in mind, 
however, that the mantra, or formula, is only the leverage and the instru- 
ment necessary to resuscitate the "crucified" sound; the mantra itself is 
not this sound, which exists only in the living, inspired content of the 
awakened individual, and thus is always creative (in becoming) and can 
never be repeated in stereotyped formulas.] 

The "death" of these sounds in the visible form is not, per se, an abso- 
lute death; it is a death relative to the sonorous archetype of which the 
external form is only an image (symbol): it is a death that in reality is only 
the silencing of inner echoes, and thus expulsion from the paradise of 
absolute activity halted by temporary inertia. (Therefore, when we per- 
ceive the world in a material way and do not realize that we are merely 
perceiving symbols, in reality we are only perceiving an illusion, or may a). 
The state of silence, or relative inertia, goes through four progressively 
dense stages. These stages correspond to four degrees of progressive de- 
scent into natural reality: 

1. Mineral kingdom. The only aspect of sound that has descended into it 
is the absolute and instantaneous act of its own halting. The only thing left 
of sound in the mineral nature is density, or specific or atomic weight, 
whose primary and vital modifications are first chemical combinations (in 
physical esotericism, the essence of the archetypal sound is called "chemi- 
cal ether") and then "electromagnetic" relationships, such as gravity, equi- 
librium, statics, cohesion, molecular attraction, etc. [In human conscious- 
ness this state corresponds to a state of sleep deeper than the ordinary 
dreamless sleep, which we call coma, catalepsis, trance, or apparent death 
(= skeleton).] 

2. Plant kingdom. The element of sound that has descended into it, be- 
sides the act of coming to a halt, has reached the next stage, namely the 
phases arranged in a series of a descent that appear in inverse order in the 
plant kingdom as developmental phases, ranging from vegetal growth to 
flowering. After the flower, we have the decline, through the fruit and the 
drying up, as far as the desiccation and mineral disintegration of the plant. 



138 
NOTES ON THE LOGOS 

In humans this state corresponds to a deep sleep without dreams (= glan- 
dular system) . 

3. Animal kingdom. The element of sound has reached not only the act 
of coming to a standstill, and the sucessive proceedings of the standstill, 
but also the renunciation of resonance, which is circumscribed in a self- 
subsisting, separated, objective form. An animal exists in its totality in its 
form (species), but its movement is only apparent. This is because while in 
the species (the visibility of the form) we find the manifestation of the 
typical instinct of each species, the movement of the animal (for example, 
in comparison to a plant, which only grows or develops) is a being moved 
by its own form and not a real movement. Movement is rather the image of 
what the animal does not have inside, but outside itself: it is the symbol of 
what has not descended into it, and which operates on it, forming it from 
the outside, as instinct, as wisdom that is reflected in it, translated into 
movement (automatic movement in respect to the consciousness of the 
single animal). The animal is dreamed into motion by beings whose very 
essence is movement: hence it looks as if the animal is moving itself, though 
in reality it is being moved. Just as a man, when he sleeps, dreams of mov- 
ing around even though he is not the author of those movements (I am not 
talking here of someone who is superconscious, but of a normal, average 
person), likewise the form of the animal is a dream-in~motion, or a dream 
dreamed by beings, whose dream creates animals of sounds that, being 
halted by opposing forces, descend into physical animal species on earth. 

4. Human kingdom, The entire sound descends into it as the inner, au- 
tonomous life in the single individual. The act of coming to a halt (den- 
sity), being pervaded by its own descending process (development), and 
by its own renunciation of resonance (form), also takes into itself the move- 
ment of the entire process. The meaning of this movement is remodulated 
from within the human being, and externalized as language. Human lan- 
guage (by "language" 1 mean every system of expressive signs, including 
the various arts) is the image of the Logos, As I have said, in man we find 
the meaning of the entire process of sound (namely of cosmic becoming), 
and this is expressed in the entire range of human movements, and in the 
entire bodily system. When we look at a person, we see not only a density 
in the process of development, with a form that expresses a certain interi- 



139 
NOTES ON THE LOGOS 

ority, but we also always see a form in movement, which moves itself (even 
during rest) in order to accept and to externalize individually the universal 
meaning. 

This entire state of speaking awareness, in man, is the state of perfect 
wakefulness. In other words, Homo credits, who while in movement re- 
veals his own interiority as universal interiority: this is Man, 

Everyone is aware of the morphological view, according to which a plant's 
leaf is nothing but a small-scale plant, and conversely the plant is nothing 
but a leaf on a large scale. Likewise, the bodily form of a human being is 
nothing but his or her own organ of language, just as the organ oflanguage 
is, on a small scale, the entire person. Since man assumes and summarizes 
in himself the previous states (mineral, vegetal, and animal), by following 
this path we can arrive, through progressive intensity at the transcendent 
perception that in human speech lives out the echoing essence of all the 
forms of the universe. 

This suggests the essence of the meaning of human freedom; this mean- 
ing arises from the consciousness of being able to ascend or descend along 
the ladder of beings (all the way down to the minerals [and below] , and all 
the way up to the Father) through its triple inner being (thought, feelings, 
will). This being lives in unitary but distinct movements (relationships 
between various human organs) and speaks in external movements (words, 
works, activities, movements of the limbs, acts of superconsciousness). 
These faculties in synthesis give it the power to pull down creatures from 
the archetypal sound into the sensible form (word-form), the beings of cre- 
ation into its own human creations. They also give this being the power to 
free and to send on their way to the original sound of the Logos, outside 
the boundaries of the physical-natural form, the beings already created, in 
the creative Word of the hierarchies. From here radiates the deep sense 
according to which aspects and beings of the world are nothing but names; 
and that the name of names is Man, entirely aware of the cosmic word 
individuated in the Self. 

One of the final thoughts of my essay: what truly matters is not so 
much that all things can be transported to the plane of the conscious word, 
and be translated into words; rather, the opposite is true, namely that the 
aspects and beings of the world (creatures, objects, angels, demons, etc.) 



140 
NOTES ON THE LOGOS 

are nothing in themselves, but the more or less alphabetized (fixed) letters 
of the universal language, and of the Logos, 

Man really (and only) expresses his entire being in this alphabet, in 
progressive movement toward the conscious actualization of his own be- 
ing, which is not a being determined by the world, but on the contrary an 
articulator, a redeemer, a creator of the world. Creatures and things are 
arrested human words. The fact that man walks around, with physical 
feet, in the well-established forest of his own inner movements (which 
have become external to himself), is the proof of the loss of the conscience 
of the unity between himself and the world. It is also the measure of the 
inner obstacles (namely the illusions) that he must overcome in order to 
recognize and activate the Logos in himself, and then to restore external 
nature outside himself to the state of the Logos. 

Therefore it is certain that everything, in its original principle (not yet 
in time) and in the consubstantial principle of the substances and aspects 
of the external world, is absolutely Living Word, By slowly transforming 
this world of death that surrounds him into Living Word, man feeds on his 
heavenly Bread, of which the earthly bread is only a symbol, bewitched 
into heavy matter. 



Arom 



First Experiences 



A 



.t the age of thirty-five, after years of hard and painful experiences, a 
strange book with an even stranger title, namely Dogma and Ritual of High 
Magic by Eliphas Levi, motivated me to learn about the esoteric sciences. 

This book made a deep impression on me, producing an internal sensa- 
tion of "being called." 

Since that time many years have gone by; I have read a great number of 
similar publications, A great stack of books, some of which were more 
important and dear to me, seemed to suggest to me: "Try! Dare! The king- 
dom of God is under siege and becomes the reward for those who know 
how to conquer it." 

1 made up my mind to apply myself resolutely to practice, with a con- 
scious and firm will. 1 achieved unexpected results almost right away. 

Should I talk about this at greater length? Maybe I should, considering 
that there are many people who limit themselves to reading and who are 
therefore either skeptical or lost in fantasies. Very few people dare to trans- 
form the heart of secret teachings into an experience. 

As 1 said, 1 achieved some results almost instantly. Now 1 must add that 
my mind's natural stability, the sense of reality I am endowed with, a spirit 
ever alert and awake during practice, and the absence of any mediumistic 
tendencies lead me to exclude the presence of any IC abnormal" or "fanta- 
sized" element in my experience. 

I have experienced the entire phenomenology discussed in the preceding 
pages, especially in the writings ofMeyrink and Abraxas, in the same order and 
with the same growing intensity as they were presented, from the first tremors oj 
the flesh immobilized by the will, to the proud and terrifying vision of one's 
own "Self" which is as bright and present as the first day of its apparition. 

Today, I can talk with ease about "this thing/' though I must confess 
that 1 would not have been able to do so awhile ago. My education, based 
on a rather nebulous "occult" literature, had either not sufficiently prepared 



142 
FIRST EXPERIENCES 

me for the true reality of the phenomena, or falsified it. Thus I committed 
many mistakes in the process of evaluation, which 1 was able to overcome 
only with a good dose of courage, 

I will not discuss here at length the methods I employed. It will suffice 
to say that I spent a few years alternating study with a slow and tenacious 
attempt to gain a greater control of my thought, and be purified from the 
''being of desire." I also practiced focusing, meditation, and concentration 
exercises, combining them, as 1 saw fit, with breathing exercises. 

In 1925 I had the first manifestations. One day, after meditation, I sud- 
denly saw some comma-shaped luminosities spinning very rapidly in a 
circular pattern. In other exercises, these "commas" became even brighter, 
eventually merging into a single cloud behind which I could see a dark, 
opaline background with a very bright light in the center of it. 53 As I con- 
tinued to practice, the dimensions of the phenomenon grew in size: I often 
had the sensation of the presence of a force sucking me in, against which 1 
reacted unconsciously. 

1 applied myself to constant exercises of accumulation ofprana through 
rhythmical breathing (sometimes accompanied by mantras) and concen- 
tration, which lasted for months. One day, as I was meditating in a dark 
room in the midafternoon, I awoke to the sense of a radiant spot located in 
the middle of my forehead: it was almost like a source of living fire acti- 
vated by the work of my mind (0) and potentized breath of prana {$). 

At that point I first experienced what some schools call the "state of the 
waters/' in which pale ghosts and shiny jellyfish shapes float around. 

For several nights my room looked as if it were flooded with flashes, of 
little suns that arose everywhere to blaze for an instant and then disappear. 
A persistent opaline light erased all contours, and even the walls of the 
room seem to disappear. At times there was a darkness pierced by sudden 
streaks of red light radiating in every direction; strange black shadows, 
sometimes huge, appeared in the background, while other radiant forms 
of light came close to me, going through and past me, causing my body to 
feel coldness and heat. This feeling was followed by a lucid calm in which 



53, We find a similar expression in an alchemical text (Dorn, Specul. philosophy in 
Thmtrum Chemicum* I, 275): "Then, with the eyes of the mind he will see a number of 
sparks, getting bigger every day, growing into a great light." 



143 
FIRST EXPERIENCES 

every dark form disappeared; bright entities entered into the picture, re- 
maining still long enough for me to see their features in my mind. 

How was I to regard these apparitions? Once 1 had aroused them, how 
could 1 get rid of them? How could I rest amid such a festival of lights? 
Those who have had the same experience know that it is useless to close 
one's eyes, since this sight does not occur through physical eyes, and this 
sound is not perceived through physical ears. How could I stop the feeling of 
floating like a feather, even though 1 was perfectly aware of lying still on 
the bed? 

And what about the sensation of possessing a radiant center of light 
between my eyes, throwing sparks of fire on everything and everywhere? 
What should 1 make of the emergence of my own image, traced in lines of 
fire on the black background of the night? 

Now I can calmly regard my fears and see that they were futile, since I 
have learned how to dominate them. But that was not the case at the time; 
even now I would not dare to laugh at them, considering how intense 
those manifestations were. 

Exhausted by the long tension, in the early morning, after a short sleep, 
I finally woke up, And then, as a reward for the hard struggle, I suddenly 
had a transfigured and novel view of nature. My half-open eyes could see 
things and beings in a new light, with such a meaning and richness as I 
had never been aware of before and that no words could possibly convey. 1 
perceived, in the freedom of contemplation, the deep forces of nature and 
of life. Although 1 had been a passionate student of natural sciences , 1 had 
never known anything quite like it before. Nothing could compare in full- 
ness, richness of details, organic and direct connection with everything that 
1 was experiencing effortlessly, while my being was in a totally neutral state. 

These experiences may not mean much in comparison to those that 
others have and still are experiencing. 

Nevertheless, 1 am firmly convinced that I have opened a path to higher 
conquests for myself. As of today I can say that I know Now it is a matter of 
using this knowledge and being able to operate in that world, the doors of 
which have been opened to me. 

Is this presumption on my part? A deep-seated voice tells me it is not. It 
tells me that I am on the right path, that the first steps have been made and 
that now what matters is to have sufficient strength to press onward. 



Ea 



The Problem of Immortality 



I 



n the following pages we will briefly show how the problem of survival 
and even that of immortality are presented from an initiatic point of view, 
This perspective, as has been said, is essentially one of experience and of 
reality. 

The first point to be made is: For what, for which entity, is there a ques- 
tion of whether or not there is survival of death? Here we do not want to 
speak about some abstract entity conceived by philosophy or theology, but 
rather one that exists concretely namely what may be called the. living 
consciousness. This is an individuated consciousness that, in practice, de- 
rives the sense of itself from its relationship to a unified psychophysical 
organism, as well as from sensible experience in general. 

Now, to affirm the survival, if not immortality, of such a consciousness 
cannot be done, mindlessly Rather, one must take into account the degree 
to which the faculties of such a consciousness, including those who are 
the basis of its organized unity, are affected by bodily contingencies. We 
can see that already in sleep, due to the disappearance of sense percep- 
tions, consciousness also disappears, or remains only in its reduced form 
of commonplace dreaming. True, one awakens from sleep and conscious- 
ness returns, but this is only because the organic unity subsists. However, 
we should not ignore the data of pathology There are some illnesses that 
gradually affect the organic unity advancing but also regressing, making 
one feel health and life again, but only to continue their course. It has 
rightly been suggested that in such cases one has the successive impres- 
sions of being born and then of dying; as the illness progresses, one has a 
sort of experience of death; one comes close enough, through what in math- 
ematics is called convergence to the limit, as to have a presentiment of the 
feeling of death, experienced as sinking and dissolution. 54 



54. On these anticipations of the experience of death in some organic illnesses, see J. M . 
Guyau, Esquisse d'une morale sans obligation n\ sanction, Paris, 1885, ch. I. sect, I, para. II. 



145 
THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY 

In reality, it would not be legitimate to expect anything else, since we 
are dealing with a consciousness that is amalgamated with the animal vi- 
tality. Therefore the problem ought to be framed in different terms: we 
should see in what cases and under what conditions we could find in a 
person something really different, something more than what is usually 
called "living consciousness." Here the initiatic teaching is clearly differ- 
ent from the majority of religious views (at least in their exoteric mean- 
ing) , since it does not posit the problem of survival and immortality in 
abstract and generic terms — for man in general — but rather with an eye to 
various possibilities and conditions. 

If in fact we are not dealing with an organized and centralized con- 
sciousness, such as we think of when we refer to the "Self," it may be 
generally admitted that something survives the crisis and sinking of death. 
Just as the physical organism does not disappear into the void but first 
produces a corpse, then the products of its dissolution, which follow vari- 
ous chemico-physical laws, much the same must apply to the "psychic 71 
part of man: that after death, a "psychic" corpse or a sort of facsimile of the 
personality of the deceased survives for some time, which in some cases 
may give rise to various manifestations. These manifestations of either the 
psychic corpse or some of its parts (in the event that its successive disin- 
tegration has already occurred) are naively assumed by spiritualists as 
"empirical" proofs of the survival of the soul; however, upon closer exami- 
nation they would instead demonstrate the opposite. The automatic char- 
acter of these surviving and now impersonal forces does not prevent the 
above-mentioned manifestations from having a particular intensity This is 
the case, for instance, when feelings, passions, deep inclinations were awak- 
ened during life and nourished until death. It is these forces that carry the 
empty image of the deceased, replacing its "Self," as was the case, after all, 
in his lifetime, though to a lesser degree. They are always "elementary" 
actions that have nothing to do with what may be called the spiritual per- 
sonality of the deceased. 55 



55, There is another case to be considered, in which the psychic residues and the 
facsimile are animated and assumed by dark forces from the otherworld. This can 
explain a greater number of parapsychological phenomena than one might think. Finally 
there are possibilities afforded by necromancy, in which the operator lends his life and 
"Self" 10 a ghost, temporarily lifting it up from that faint existence which in the classical 
traditions corresponded to Hades. 



146 
THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY 

The employment of this last expression requires a clarification, since it 
obviously implies something more than what is called a living conscious- 
ness. In the. context of ontology; it is clear that without any relation with a 
transcendent principle not only man, but no being in the natural world 
could enjoy an existence, not even an illusory one. From an initiatic point 
of view it must be said that one feels a "Self precisely because of the reflec- 
tion of a superior principle; and the conditional nature of ordinary con- 
sciousness may be understood as that existing between a reflected image 
and the means by which that image is formed. Between the two there is a 
strict relation that defines and even organizes what in Hindu terms may be 
called the "Self of the elements" or, better yet, the <c samsaric Self," 56 while 
the corresponding notion in classical terminology is the soul, as opposed 
to the nous: the mind seen as an Olympian and incorruptible principle. 

When a mirror is broken, it does not affect the object reflected in it, but 
its image disappears. It is in these terms that we must interpret the phe- 
nomenon of death, when it has only a negative outcome, as has been said 
concerning the living consciousness. In this case, that which has the na- 
ture of a human Self does not survive. More precisely what occurs is radi- 
cal change of state; besides the ghostly and psychic residues mentioned 
above, which are automatisms that continue to exist out of inertia, that 
which is properly the life of the samsaric Self is reabsorbed into a 
subpersonal stock, which may be defined as a "root-being." On this plane 
it is again possible to conceive of a survival sui generis, since this being has 
not only given life to a certain body, but may also give it to others, both 
before and after it. At the dissolution of a given psychophysical aggrega- 
tion and reflection of the Self carried by it, that force persists, becomes 
latent, as the potential of a fire capable of being kindled anew, which signi- 
fies a new individual, a new existence. Naturally, here it is not only a case 
of the species and the biological stock, nor of the lives produced by the 
same blood through sexual generation. The existences that are various 
manifestations of that being, with very rare exceptions, may appear abso- 
lutely detached and extraneous to each other. What connects them is a 
nexus that escapes the physical senses, an invisible nexus that does not 
have a material basis. Here we must confine ourselves to this brief men- 



56, A very expressive term used by the Gnostics Lo define this very principle is that of 
counterfeit spirit. 



147 
THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY 

tion, which is necessary for an overall orientation, since the problem of 
the relationship between the various legacies that man incorporates would 
take us too far at this point, but may be treated on another occasion. 

In any event, not the least reason for this mention is the need to dispel 
the misunderstanding about reincarnation, a view that, unlike what many 
contemporary "spiritualists" and Theosophists think, does not correspond 
at all to an esoteric teaching. That which appears to refer to it in many East- 
ern and Western texts is only a symbolic and popular way of expressing a 
doctrine with an altogether different meaning. Generally speaking, it is a 
contradiction in terms that a "sams&ric Self (which for the great majority of 
cases is what passes for someone's "Self') may reincarnate. It is a contradic- 
tion because the relative identity of such a Self consists only in function of a 
given psychophysical organism, namely in function of a given combination 
that, once dissolved, will never reappear in the same way. That which con- 
tinues in a series of existences is not what is produced, but the producing 
force, namely the subpersonal power mentioned before. In other words: if 
we were to call A, B, C, etc., the "Selves 15 that have taken form in various 
existences of the series, it is not A that reincarnates in B and then in C and so 
on, but rather it is the force that has acted in A and into which A is dissolved 
again that manifests itself again in B, and then in C, etc. The continuity falls 
exclusively on the side of this force that is not a Self nor the living conscious- 
ness. However, if by virtue of some miraculous operation, A (the Self of a 
given existence) could see before itself B and C, etc., namely the beings that 
are its supposed "reincarnations," they would and must appear to it as extra- 
neous, as other people or Selves, distinct from it in space. 

The plane on which reincarnation maybe true is the samsaric plane (the 
world of the Waters, the Hellenic "cycle of necessity" ), and thus it has noth- 
ing to do with that of the spiritual personality Thus, let me say in passing, 
there are good reasons to be suspicious of any doctrine that gives preemi- 
nence to the idea of reincarnation, unless its purpose is only the practical 
one of creating a background in order to highlight the entirely contrary 
direction, the one leading to "liberation." I am not denying that there are 
special experiences tha t may lend some sort of proof to the doctrine of rein- 
carnation: it is just a matter of interpreting them correctly Similar experi- 
ences have become extremely rare these days, especially in the West, due to 
the fact that the individual Self has assumed an increasingly rigid form, 



147 
THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY 

tion, which is necessary for an overall orientation, since the problem of 
the relationship between the various legacies that man incorporates would 
take us too far at this point, but may be treated on another occasion. 

In any event, not the least reason for this mention is the need to dispel 
the misunderstanding about reincarnation, a view that, unlike what many 
contemporary "spiritualists" and Theosophists think, does not correspond 
at all to an esoteric teaching. That which appears to refer to it in many East- 
ern and Western texts is only a symbolic and popular way of expressing a 
doctrine with an altogether different meaning, Generally speaking, it is a 
contradiction in terms that a "samsaric Self (which for the great majority of 
cases is what passes for someone's "Self) may reincarnate. It is a contradic- 
tion because the relative identity of such a Self consists only in function of a 
given psychophysical organism, namely in function of a given combination 
that, once dissolved, will never reappear in the same way. That which con- 
tinues in a series of existences is not what is produced, but the producing 
force, namely the subpersonal power mentioned before. In other words: if 
we were to call A, B, C, etc., the "Selves" that have taken form in various 
existences of the series, it is not A that reincarnates in B and then in C and so 
on, but rather it is the force that has acted in A and into which A is dissolved 
again that manifests itself again in B, and then in C, etc. The continuity falls 
exclusively on the side of this force that is not a Self nor the living conscious- 
ness. However, if by virtue of some miraculous operation, A (the Self of a 
given existence) could see before itself B and C, etc., namely the beings that 
are its supposed "reincarnations," they would and must appear to it as extra- 
neous, as other people or Selves, distinct from it in space. 

The plane on which reincarnation may be true is the samsaric plane (the 
world of the Waters, the Hellenic "cycle of necessity"), and thus it has noth- 
ing to do with that of the spiritual personality. Thus, let me say in passing, 
there are good reasons to be suspicious of any doctrine that gives preemi- 
nence to the idea of reincarnation, unless its purpose is only the practical 
one of creating a background in order to highlight the entirely contrary 
direction, the one leading to "liberation." I am not denying that there are 
special experiences that may lend some sort of proof to the doctrine of rein- 
carnation: it is just a matter of interpreting them correctly Similar experi- 
ences have become extremely rare these days, especially in the West, due to 
the fact that the individual Self has assumed an increasingly rigid form, 



148 
THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY 

evermore closing in on itself. However, it is possible , thanks to some sudden 
insight, or through initiatic practices, to remove the limitation and gain a cer- 
tain awareness of the deeper root of one's own life. Then what arises is the 
samsaric consciousness, which may even assume the likeness of a memory; in 
the deep, subpersonal trunk, there really exists the memory of other exist- 
ences, of those that, in a discontinuous series of "Selves, 15 arose as ephemeral 
manifestations of the same, unexhausted trunk. But the only meaning of this 
is as a temporary removal from the individual consciousness and of a kind of 
"descent into hell." This corresponds, from case to case, either to a regres- 
sion or to a certain (albeit virtual) superindivi duality In fact, once the limit 
of individual consciousness is removed, it would follow that the same con- 
sciousness, if awake, would be lost, as when sleeping, and no experience would 
be possible. Only due to a sort of echo of more ancient states did a samsaric 
semiconsciousness subsist in the East, which attenuated that feeling of the 
one and only earthly life of die Self that in the West represents the normal and 
common view. But if we are not speaking of regressions or fringes of a con- 
sciousness that has not been entirely defined and stabilized, samsaric con- 
sciousness should be regarded as a form of initiatic consciousness. 57 The reader 
may recall that in the original Buddhist texts, where mention is made of the 
vision of multiple lives, this recollection is connected in an unequivocal way 
to stages of high contemplation. It is an experience that presupposes detachment. 
We have now reached the very heart of the initiatic problem of survival 
and the doctrine of the conditional nature both of survival and of immor- 
tality. To describe the Self, we have used the image of a reflection con- 
nected to the means through which this reflection occurred. We may now 
imagine a return from the reflection to its source, which is something that 
implies a separation, a revulsion, a detachment, corresponding to a change 
of state and a deep crisis. What occurs is more or less as in death: a failing 
of the habitual support supplied by the body and the samsaric vitality 
Such is the initiatic death, which may well be described as a death, in ef- 
fect, realized in an experimental way, occurring after the initiate has been 
endowed with a power capable of supporting his consciousness.^ He who 
has undergone this death has ceased to be a mere man: he is no longer tied 



57. See the essay by Abraxas in the first chapter. 

58. The Hermetic separatio (separation), which in the texts is described as a "mortifica- 
tion" or as "death," has precisely this meaning. We may also recall the texr in St. Paul 



149 
THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY 

to an individual form; his "Self ' no longer is a reflection, but rather a 
being. He has actualized the ''spiritual personality." Having done that, the 
support of the physical body and of sensible experience may fail without 
the individual consciousness becoming dissolved and sinking. Thus the 
positive condition for survival of death is realized, and it can eventually be 
corraborated by cross- checking. In certain conditions, what may be in- 
duced are states in which one can say: "Everything that comes to me from 
the world of the senses is suppressed, and yet 1 perceive my consciousness 
to be clear, transparent, and intangible." In regard to the character of con- 
creteness of the initiatic transformation, it will suffice to remember the 
saying that scandalized many people in already "enlightened" ancient 
Greece , namely that if a criminal is initiated at Eleusis, his destiny after 
death cannot be compared to that awaiting the most virtuous or famous 
man, such as Epaminondas. In fact, despite all the improvements that can 
be made on an elephant, it will never become a cat. They are two different 
species. The initiatic mystery is precisely that of metamorphosis, of the 
passage from one species to another. 

At this point we should emphasize strongly that conscious survival af- 
ter death is not to be automatically equated with immortality. This leads us 
back to the theory of the hierarchy of worlds and of states of being, and 
also to the so-called cyclical laws. We shall only briefly mention these 
here. The only Immortal, in an absolute sense, is the Unconditioned, the 
principle beyond all manifestation. Immortality thus exists only as "Olym- 
pian 51 immortality in a higher sense, proceeding from a state of union with 
the Unconditioned. Those who have already realized the conditions for 
survival may aim for this supreme goal But it is not certain that they will 
succeed. One can try while alive to achieve the complete "liberation" that 
makes one immortal. Some possibilities are offered at the moment of death. 
Others are offered in posthumous states, in which the knowledge and con- 
sciousness of the initiate, unlike those of ordinary people, continue to exist. 
In order to achieve immortality, it is necessary to bum every tendency that 
would urge one to assume this or that superhuman "seat 17 ("angelic," one 



(Hebrews 4:13) that says: "The word of God is a living sword, which penetrates even to 
dividing soul and spirit, and sunders the mind from the motions of the heart." Origen 
(De principiis, III, 3) talks about a soul of the flesh — the "samsaric Self" — as opposed to 
the spirit, adding that it is connected to a "person's blood." Cf. the initiatic expression: 
"To chill the blood." 



150 
THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY 

might say, or "heavenly") since all this, from an initiatic point of view, still 
belongs to the manifested, conditioned state, and not to the unconditioned, 
and has no "eternal" character. If the struggle for immortality occurred in 
truly a magical context, the task would consist of resisting the beings whom 
one encounters (they are personifications of certain modes of being), by 
generating, in their exact direction, a higher intensity than theirs. Here the 
principle is that once a relationship has been established, to fail to dominate 
means to become dominated immediately and hence bound to a given exis- 
tential condition. But even on the magical path, at the summit the force 
must become transfigured into pure light, into "liberation." 

Overall, it is necessary to trace a clear demarcation line between those 
who survive and the "immortals" on the one hand, and the overwhelming 
majority of people on the other This is what not only the initiatic schools 
but also almost all ancient religions have always acknowledged. The idea 
that everybody possesses an "immortal soul," conceived moreover as a 
facsimile of his living consciousness and individual earthly Self, is a true 
ideological aberration, although its usefulness as opium for the masses at 
times cannot be denied. 

What is capable of surviving death and being immortal is not the "soul" 
but the mind as nous, as a supernatural element. But it is useless to talk 
about it and say that it is indestructible and eternal when there is no con- 
tact and no continuity between the consciousness living in the samsaric 
reflection and such a principle. The "soul" may survive only when it joins 
the "mind," becoming the enduring and unfailing soul mentioned by Agrippa, 
This is the metabole, the change of polarity of which initiation is the start- 
ing point. The soul, instead of leaning on the natural being, leans on the 
supernatural being and becomes integrated with it. In this way a new form 
is createdj which is not affected by death. Once the body disintegrates, 
rather than the spectral residue, this form becomes free, as a "body" of 
incorruptible light. It corresponds to the energy that, through appropriate 
transformations, will eventually be manifested on the plane of being that 
befits the particular "knowledge" and "dignity" of the initiate. Moreover, 
everything of the individual consciousness that has been integrated into 
the enduring and unfailing soul will escape death and create a sort of sub- 
stratum of continuity which, incidentally, as Agrippa suggests, is also the 
active principle in every operation of higher magic. 



Leo 



Beyond the Threshold 

of Sleep 



I 



n ordinary human experience, .sleep is the voiding of consciousness and 
a sort of apparent death, barely illuminated by the mirage of dreams. The 
deeper ihe sleep and the more consciousness is submerged, the more one 
is satisfied, as if the ideal condition had been achieved. 

Bui when a greater introversion is achieved: when the inner life, after 
being strengthened: becomes most important; and when the external world 
ceases to be experienced as the only center of interest — at thai point one 
vaguely perceives that life during sleep is a continuation of the waking 
state* rather than a pause in it, an integration of the waking state rather 
than a sudden, periodic s ami unintelligible interruption. 

It is useless to look for an explanation of the mystery of sleep when one 
is not capable of a change in the orientation of individual consciousness. 
Scientific theories thai have iried lo explain this enigma have failed be- 
cause they tried to explain it with the means thar are commonly employed 
in research into external phenomena. No explanation has ever been found 
in the physical body as sueh : .since nothing really happens when one falls 
asleep; the. body undergoes sleep, and the. real change is obviously not in 
the physical and bodily order. Something invisible wanders away from 
the body and takes consciousness along with it. The ordinary vital phe- 
nomena continue, hut the connection of the psychic life with the brain is 
interrupted. 

In regard to what has been said so far about the ''subtle body" we may 
note a kind of splitting occurring in it. A group of forces in it, aimed at 
giving life and form* remains in the physical body when it is asleep, thus 
differentiating it from y cadaver The K ryil P u ^ force* that presides over 
ihought, feeling, and ihe various impulses lo aclion appears to depart »nd 
to lead its own life. Thus the solution of this enigma cannot come from a 



153 
BEYOND THE THRESHOLD OF SLEEP 

materialistic research nor from mere theoretical notions, but rather from a 
conquest of one's own consciousness, which is an amplification, a trans- 
formation, and the opening of one's eyes to a new, inner horizon. 

As was mentioned before, the first step consists in a change of attitude 
toward the night and sleep. It is necessary to react against the tendency to 
let oneself go, and against the notion that the night is the kingdom of 
darkness. The night, on the contrary, is a cosmic awakening, the emer- 
gence, palpitation, and echo of spiritual forces overwhelmed by the force 
of physical solar light. During the night a spiritual sun rises, and our subtle 
body seeks it and tries to orient itself toward it. It is necessary to cultivate 
a sense of expectation for a form of life that is incommensurably freer and 
wider than ordinary life during wakefulness. 

Here it is necessary to anticipate an objection and to answer it right 
away One might say that such an attitude, which tries to turn sleep into 
some sort of superwakefulness, must interfere with what sleep is supposed 
to accomplish, namely rest and the restoration of the physical energies. 
But this is not the case. On the contrary, following this phase of the expe- 
rience, the organic restoration emerges faster and more complete, since 
one enters into contact wilh the restoring forces and begins to cooperate 
with them. In this way, the need to u tollapse" for eight or ten hours, after 
which one wakes up feeling drugged arid "heavy," is done away with. After 
a few hours one will wake up spontaneously in a lively state, feeling re- 
freshed, energized, and experiencing a sense of courage and active superi- 
ority when facing ones daily tasks. 

After cultivating this attitude, for a period of time, we need to take it 
one step further. In the process of tailing asleep, when shifting from one 
stale of consciousness to another, there is a moment of darkness and dis- 
continuity thai needs to be overcome. It is necessary to throw a bridge 
across to the other side of our Self, in its fullness of distinct being, as to 
another external world that lies beyond the world of physical senses. It is 
necessary 7 to learn again the art of falling asleep." In a previous essay en- 
titled "Summary/* we already mentioned something of this sort. 

One should lie on the bed with the head somewhat elevated. Today's 
tendency to sleep with the head al the same level of the body, if not lower, 



39, This art corresponds lo the art of flying, no less neglected 3«U lust for so long. (Note 
by UR) 



154 
BEYOND THE THRESHOLD OF SLEEP 

is a very poor habit based on the mistaken assumption that "the more 
blood flows to the head, the better for the nervous system," Tn reality, a 
greater flow of blood causes a significant compression of the nervous sub- 
stance. Moreover, from an initiatic perspective we know that blood is some- 
thing more than the vehicle for repairing substances of the tissues: it is a 
fluid that carries with itself much of the external world in the form of 
obscure images, and it communicates them to the brain during the state of 
sleep, thus imparting a disorderly and irrational activity to it. It may even 
carry what is characteristic and pathological in the organs that it goes 
through, thus negatively affecting dreams. 

On the contrary, if the flow of blood is not too strong, a properly trained 
brain is able to retain the necessary calm and receptivity needed in the 
morning to remember the experiences realized inside the subtle body. 

Likewise, by now the stomach needs to be empty, since the pressure on 
the diaphragm and the solar plexus could disturb the organs correspond- 
ing to the centers of the subtle body, thus altering or inhibiting from the 
very start their receptivity to the rhythms. 

I have already said that a body of forces remains in the body during 
sleep; if these forces were to leave the body too, sleep would be replaced by 
the cataleptic state. At first one should not try to detach this group of 
forces, but rather endow it with a certain mobility that makes it indepen- 
dent and more oriented toward the subtle than the physical body What 
will follow is the establishment of a rhyLhmicization and a slowing down 
of breath and blood circulation, which constitutes a very favorable state 
for experiences during the life of sleep. The group of vital and formative 
forces will then function as an intermediary between the physical body 
and what the Self experiences in an immaterial way 

Under certain conditions this group of forces assumes the autonomy of 
a true vital body which, as already stated, should enjoy a certain degree of 
mobility inside the physical body The best moment to attempt to deter- 
mine this mobility is as soon as sleep begins to set in. One must imagine to 
be able to spin around a hypothetical axis in the body (from left to right), 
and at the same time retain an image or symbol that refers to our spiritual 
nature and is attuned to a sense of the divine and to a sense of elevation. If 
it is possible to have a clear concept in the mind and to practice the exer- 



155 
BEYOND THE THRESHOLD OF SLEEP 

cise for mobility in full consciousness when the detachment has already 
begun, one will first detect it in the hands and in the arms. 

It is possible to conduct a lesser experiment to verify this. Hold an 
object in one hand and lean it outside the bed: at some point, you will feel 
that the object has fallen and realize that you have lost the sense of the 
position of the hand itself. If you fall asleep with the above-mentioned 
concept in mind for a sufficiently long time, in the morning you will wake 
up with that same concept + x, What I mean is that something will join 
this concept and become more distinct, remaining as a sense of our noc- 
turnal cosmic life. 

It is necessary not to be in a hurry to interpret things and to explain 
(clarity must come by itself, not through the physical brain), since every 
anticipation is bound to be a distortion. Ones mind must be totally free, 
since it is possible that revelations will contrast with ones judgments and 
our desires during the wakeful state, concerning both oneself and other 
things. Criticism can come later. In the meantime we must slow down 
instinctive reactions and the inclination to understand according to the 
preordained patterns of our mind and feelings. 

Naturally this is not all there is to it. In reality all of our diurnal activi- 
ties should also be properly oriented. I have set out some suggestions in 
chapters I and II, as well as in relation to the sense of the subtle body in 
chapter III. In those who have attained the necessary maturity the rest will 
come of its own accord. They will spontaneously discover other attitudes 
and possible applications in daily life. The sense of an inner light will always 
remain in us, as a calm and constant feeling alongside our ordinary activities. 

Also keep in mind that for every spiritual achievement, our sense of 
"bodily" or "animal ego 1 ' — which is very different from the true sense of 
Self — is fatal: in other words, the sense of self that is typical of one who 
aims to grab everything for himself in order to satisfy his nature as a lim- 
ited and greedy being. Sic nos non nobis (thus we are not for ourselves) is 
the best attitude to assume. Those who turn back to contemplate what 
they have obtained and to enjoy it become paralyzed and are turned to 
stone, just like Lot's wife in the Bible; it becomes their downfall, like Nar- 
cissus, whose being died due to his love for his own image. 



Ea 

On the Magical 
View of Life 



The title of the following essay should not induce the reader to attribute 
a universal validity to the ideas found therein. These are rather "truths" 
to he assumed in a given phase of the development, in view of a prelimi- 
nary liberation and purification of the soul. Such a development may 
take this form especially in the "way of the warrior" — the kshatriya, to 
use the Hindu term. Once the fruit of such a discipline has been achieved, 
various perspectives may change and the point of view proper to the 
true transcendent realization be accessed, (Note by UR) 



s. 



'elf-overcoming, aside from being the object of rites, is connected to a 
renewed, heroicized perception of the world and of life, not as an abstract 
concept of the mind, but as something that pulsates in the rhythm of one's 
own blood. It is the sensation of the world as power, or the sensation of the 
world as a sacrificial act. A great freedom, with action as the sole law 
Everywhere beings made of strength, and, at the same time, a cosmic breath- 
ing, a sense of height, of airiness. 

Action needs to be liberated. It must be realized in and of itself, disin- 
fected from mental fever, cleansed from hatred and craving. These truths 
must penetrate the soul: there is no place to go to, nothing to ash for, nothing 
to hope for, nothing to fear. The world is free: goals and reasons, "evolution," 
fate or providence — all that is fog, an invention by beings who did not yet 
know how to walk on their own and needed crutches and supports. Now 
you will be kit to yourself. You must perceive yourself as a render of strength 
and know the action that is no longer dictated by this or that object, but 
for (.he sake of itself. You will no longer be moved: detached, you will 



157 
ON THE MAGICAL VIEW OF LIFE 

move. The objects around you will cease to be objects of desire for you — 
they will become objects of action. Gravitating around things that no longer 
exist, the impulses of an irrational life will finally become extinguished: 
what will fall is also the sense of effort, the habit of running around, of 
doing, the painful seriousness and need, the tragic sentiment and the Ti- 
tanic bond: in other words the great disease itself, namely the human sense 
of life. A superior calm will ensue. From this will come action, pure and 
purifying action: it is an action ready at any time and in any place, to take 
any direction- It is a flexible action, free toward itself, superior to winning 
and losing, success and failure, selfishness and altruism, happiness and 
misery; action released from bonds, from identification, from attachment. 

In such an action you will be able to find purification, since according 
to it the "individual" no longer counts and because it takes you beyond 
both abstract knowledge and the irrational impetus of inferior forces. Not 
ghosts of concepts and ideas and "values" — but rather a vision without ref- 
erence points, having as its only direct object reality itself. Action awakened 
as an elementary thing, simple, unrestrained. Power of commanding and 
power o f obey i ng: both absolute* to be. tiuintessentialized in the way that is 
required for evocations and identifications, as for those immediate, imma- 
terial encounters with "presences," in which some may ascend and disap- 
pear, powerful and invisible, while others precipitate into bodily forms. 

In ordinary life it is necessary to follow a discipline capable of realizing 
the uselessness of all sentimentalism. and all emotional complications. Tn 
their place., a clear gaze and an appropriate action. As with a surgeon, 
instead of compassion and mercy an operation that solves the problem. As 
with a warrior or athlete, instead of fear and irrational agitation in the face 
of danger, the instant resolve of doinj» what lies in one's power, Mercy, fear, 
hope, impatience, anxiety — these are all spiritual raw-iris that nourish 
occult and vampiric powers of negation. Take compassion, for instance; it 
does not eliminate anything from the other's misfortune, but allows it to 
perturb your spirit. If you can, then act: assume the person of the other 
and give him your strength. Otherwise detach yourself. It is the same for 
hatred: when you hate, you degrade yourself. If you desire, if your sense of 
justice demands it, tear down and cut away without your spirit becoming 
perturbed. Moreover, remember that by hating you decline. Hatred alters 
and it. prevents you from controlling the influence of your opponent; worse 



158 

ON THE MAGICAL VIEW OF LIFE 

yet it opens you to his own influence, which you can instead know and 
paralyze, if you remain calm, without reacting. Those who want the knowl- 
edge and the power of good and evil must slay their "passion" for "good" or 
for "evil." They need to be able to give as a pure act, as an absolute gift, not 
for the enjoyable feeling of sympathy or mercy; they need to be able to 
strike down without hatred. "I am in the strong ones the strength that is 
free from desire and passion" — balam balvattim asmi k&mar&gavivarjitam — 
this is what Krishna says about himself as that force and purity over which 
nothing has power, before which even the law of action and reaction can 
no longer take hold. 60 As soon as that fever, the dark force of instinct, of 
craving or aversion, removes one from this central inner disposition, even 
the greatest of the gods is ruined. 

Detachment, silence, solitude — this is what prepares the liberation of 
this view of life and of the world. 

Distance between human beings. Not to recognize oneself in others: 
never feeling superior, equal, or inferior to them. In this world, beings are 
alone, without law, with no escape, without excuse, clothed only in their 
strength or weakness: peaks, stones, sand. This is the first liberation of the 
view of life. To overcome the brotherly contamination, the need to love 
and to feel loved, to feel together, to feel equal and joined with others. 
Purge yourself of this. Beginning at a certain point you will not feel united 
with somebody because of blood, affections, country, or human destiny 
You will feel united only with those who are on your same path, which is 
not the human path, having no regard for human ways. 

When you look around, try to perceive the voice oj what i.s inanimate, 
"How beautiful they are, these free forces that have not yet been stained by 
the spirit I" (Nietzsche) 

Do not say these, forces are "not yet," but rather "no longer" stained 
with "spirit," and understand that by "spirit 1 ' is meant what is "unreal." In 
other words, everything that man, with his sentiments, thoughts, fears, 
and hopes has projected onto nature in order to render it more intimate, or 
in order to make it. speak the same language. Abandon all this and try to 
understand the message of things, especially where they appear foreign. 



60. Bhufftvad Cita t IM, 47^K; 3:10; 7:1 !. 



159 
ON THE MAGICAL VIEW OF LIFE 

naked, mute — where they have no soul because they are something greater 
than "soul." This is the first step toward the liberation of the view of the 
world. On the plane of magic you will know a world that has returned to 
the free, intensive, and essential state, in a state in which nature is not 
nature, nor the spirit "spirit"; in which there are no things, men, specula- 
tions about "gods" — but rather powers — and life is a heroic affair of every 
moment, made of symbols, illuminations, commands, ritual, and sacrifi- 
cial actions. 

In this world there is no longer a "here" or a "there," or attachment; 
everything is infinitely equal and infinitely diverse, and action originates 
from itself, pure and hidden. The "Wind," the "Breath" (the Breath of the 
Hermetic "Great Green") carries everything in the sense of a sacrifice, an 
offering, a luminous and marvelous ritual, among zones of an activity as 
calm as the deepest sleep, and immobility as intense as the most vehement 
tornado. 

That which is "human" here melts away as a dark memory of misery 
and as the specter of a long nightmare. The Angel awakens, the Ancient 
Tce m : immobility and a vertiginously slow pace resolve every tension; this 
is ihe threshold and the transfiguration; beyond it. lies — the world of t he 
eternal. 



fjl. Tin* author is making an untranslatable wordplay here in the Italian, using ihe wiinls 
angelo (angel) and antko gelo (ancient ice), (hditors note) 



Abraxas 



The Second Preparation 
of the Hermetic Caduceus 



I 



n chapter III I told you the first secret of the Great Work; "Create an 
image and stare at it. In the darkness, get used to seeing with an invisible 
light," Then, with the practice of the mirror, I told you how you can en- 
tirely detach the sense of sight from the physical world and external space 
and actualize it in the ethereal light. 

This is the beginning. The perfection of this starting point, which is 
available to the adepts, 02 consists in knowing during the day, as you are 
awake, how to see and not to see at the same time — to see in the. invisible 
light and to not see in the visible. 

Be aware, however, that our goal is not the passive ecstasy of one who 
only sees and perceives the manifestations, but rather the capacity to di- 
rect them and to project on them his own strength , to create them and to 
destroy them by provoking corresponding effects in the physical world 
and on the beings inhabiting it. 

This is the second phase of the Opus magicum. The name we give it is: 
the second preparation of the Hermetic Caduceus. 

Every magical realization implies an active, dry, and fixed principle that acts 
sympathetically on a passive, humid, and volatile principle: that is, a "projec- 
tion" in the vehicle of a clothing of sulfurous fire, also known as breath and 
burning water. First of all one needs to prepare with the Art these two ele- 
ments or principles in our hermetically sealed "philosophical vessel." 

62. This achievement requires the connection that in an ordinary person rigidly connects 
the subtle body to the physical body to become \mstabk (this Amounts m saying: it 
rtijuiri-.s a t:i*riain exiinaltm of desire. ti& a power of identification) . Then the will can 
intervene directly and produce with an inner act the isolation of the subtle body, thus 
neutralizing all the physical perceptions and seeing only with tin* Lrint-r si^hi. (Nuu^ by UR.) 



161 
THE SECOND PREPARATION OF THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS 

Let me remind you what "hermetic sealing 1 ' means: the guard at the 

doors of the senses — and: .SiZenctf. Initiatory silence does not consist merely 
in not talking (not even with yourself), hut also in not hearing and in not 
reading. Detach yourself mentally from your surroundings, by realizing 
that nothing can or may be allowed to disturb you: "The unrighteous will 
not succeed in affecting my equilibrium/' 

When magi claim ihaE the "vessel" must be made of pure crystal and 
very strong, they are pointing out that in your consciousness, or "labora- 
tory,* in addition to constant tenacity 5 ; everything must be transparent. You 
need to be able to see clearly and objectively within yourself, as if under 
the light of the sun, and also to realize the absolute impossibility of being 
insincere with yourself. 

The masculine active principle is still our Gold 0, but it is exalted, 
freed, and fixed. 

Remember the first preparation of this principle (see chapter IV). It is a 
soothing, unifying, and dominating of the mind; it is the calm, energetic 
being superior lo yourself; it is the nucleus that in the intoxicating atmo- 
sphere of the "soul of the earth" knows how to resist passion by remaining 
steady in the impure impetus of the "waters/ 7 Eliphas Levi (Dogma and 
Ritual of High Magic) said that the magus thinks and wills; he does not love 
anything for the sake of desire, and does not reject anything out of pas- 
sion. The word "passion" designates a passive Slate, whereas the magus is 
always active and victorious. A magus in love* or a jealous or lazy magus, is 
a contradiction in terms. The most difficult part is ro attain (his realiza- 
tion, since when the magus has created himself, I he Gneai Work is virtu- 
ally completed in its essential principle. The "Great Magical Agenl,"* the 
natural mediator of human omnipotence! cannot be enslaved and di reeled 
by anything other than a supernatural principle, which is an independent will. 

Kremmerz adds: create a state of perfect neutrality, of positive indiffer- 
ence, through a complete equilibrium in yourself. Become superior to both 
goad and evil, since your continuous equilibrium and the power to develop 
all subtle forces and to use them as you please depend on your neutrality 
I o ward both. 

In regard lo i he il second preparation" of our Gold, you can attain it in a 
regular way through consec ration or investiture, namely through the aid of 
philosophical vinegar and corrosive waters, as long as you know how to 



162 
THE SECOND PREPARATION OF THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS 

resist them. I must tell you, though, that under certain special conditions, 
you may perform it even through cruelty and suffering. 

Dispassionately inflict an extreme physical pain on yourself and en- 
dure it for a number of minutes; stand up to it, and then grow stronger — 
until you have the power to silence it. 

Do violence to yourself. Do not do what you like, but what costs you: 
on principle, always take the path of greatest resistance. Shift the natural 
pleasure for this or that object to the pleasure of "having wanted." In con- 
formity with an ancient formula of our Tradition, according to which in 
order to "dissolve" a "metal" it is necessary to make it red-hot and then 
immerse it in water, excite, exasperate an instinct, an impulse, a desire, 
and then, abruptly when its fulfillment is at hand, suspend it. At that point 
the supersensible "eye" will see flashes come out of the lower centers and 
run snakelike toward the higher centers of the head, which by absorbing 
the former's strength begins to shine with a formidable light. This virtue of 
theirs is powerful and dry; it is the golden virtue of absolute command and 
of the absolute conception in magical realizations- 
Enough said about the preparation of Gold. Now I will deal with the 
second principle, namely with the astral force or the fluidic being itself. 
According to the importance of the operations, the magi act through the 
fluidic being of their body — or through the fluidic being of a magical 
chain — or through the fluidic being that is a Spirit of the elements, a cos- 
mic Power (angels, genii). They also utilize the procedures of sexual magic. 
For now, pay attention to everything that concerns the operations of the 
first type; if you understand them, you will understand the principle of the 
others as well 

The magical act is one of concrete fluidification of the will, or an im- 
maculate, androgynous conception in which the fluidic force operates as a 
feminine principle in the creative realization under the inspiring and mas- 
culine action of the solar principle. You have already been told about the 
sense of the fluidic body and how, in the first preparation of the Caduceus, 
it is extracted from the physical body. But just, as in the second phase of the 
operation an exaltation of Gold is required, such that it will absorb 1 he 
stronger and drier virtues of the "Iron of the Wise," likewise, for the fluidic 
phase, what is required is a second regimen called "igm/icaiion of the astral 



163 
THE SECOND PREPARATION OF THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS 

The fluidic body at the first stage is i = distilled water, also called 
"matter in the white state" 1 or "washed" matter. Cesare della Riviera (II 
mondo magico degli Herd, Milan, 1506, p. 56) called it "most limpid water, 
lying immobile in its clean and clear vessel.'* It is an immaterial, bright, 
calm, suspended, and still sensation, which is extracted through the im- 
mersion of consciousness in that which, sub specie interioritatis, corresponds 
to the nervous system. But now you must strive for a deeper magical linking 
with the physical body, pushing consciousness downward until it becomes amal- 
gamated with the bloodstream — this is how you will obtain the fluidic $ as 
"matter in the red state." This is the "water of life," burning water or sulfuric 
water, since it "really burns both visibly and invisibly actively and pas- 
sively." It is magnesius magnensis in the explanation given by the "Great 
Book of Nature" (Italian ed., "Atanor," p. 117) of "philosophical powder or 
projection made with human blood," and tinctura microcosmi magistere in 
the explanation given by the same book (p. 120) of "human blood em- 
ployed to make a lamp of life." It is Auri aura, like that gentle wind that, 
according to Hermes' "Emerald Tablet," carries the "heroic stone" in its belly 
It is the "virgins milk" that nourishes the conceived solar and divine seed, 
which is intact, hidden, not acting, at the center of the center; through it, 
as the universal menstruum or solvent according to its igneous virtue, the 
magical or "heroic' 1 art is actualized, (See Della Riviera, loc. cit, 56-61 .) 

The "ignification" or rubtdo consists in awakening in ¥ — or immersing 
in V — the inner fire or sulfur ^ that resides in the heart With this operation 
y, which is the passive and feminine Mercury the light of the Moon, and 
chaste nudity of Diana, is transformed into $, which is active and creative 
Mercury As we recall that £ = sulfur is composed of A and +, this Mercury 
carries with it not only +, namely the consecration of equilibrium and 
neutrality of our first Gold, but also A, that is, the ascending force, the 
igneous and taurine power, the energy of animation and growth that is 
represented, in the symbol, by the male T of the higher part of <£ replacing 
the lunar ^ of ^; this power, astrologically speaking, corresponds to &, 
namely to Sagittarius, which is the being of projections. 

Preceding from symbolism to practice, you must take up the ritual that 
leads to the sense of the "subtle body" explained in my previous essay 
found in chapter III. For a further step, you must choose between two 
paths, which correspond to solar magic and to hiac magic. In Isiac magic 



164 
THE SECOND PREPARATION OF THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS 

the iluidic body that, produces ihe realization, by covering, as a "vesture of 
power" and an "astral whirlwind, " the idea or the command posited by the 
positive center 0, is ignified by the wild, turbid force of a passion burning 
with desire: it is a demon who acts and turns it into a flame — of hatred, 
lust, or destruction. In solar or high magic, what is at work is a clean and 
superhuman science. Wi th an enlightened and calm firmness, after assum- 
ing the fluidic stale, you are instructed to shift to your heart through the 
ritual that others have already explained, following a ritual evocation of 
fire. You are also told to fix yourself there, and through visualization to 
ignite and grow a flame in it, into which you will he absorbed, 6 - 1 

The * transformation w that will ensue — from an inner, luminous stale you 
shift to a state of diffuse active heat — is the knowledge o/$. Then ihe compo- 
sition of the second element, or the "androgynous fire," is completed. 

As with S, let your consciousness fix this state. Then let it go, bur. evoke 
it several times more until you feel it in your power to awaken it at will. 
Then learn to moderate its ardor in a gentle, slow, lempered, and continu- 
ous way, so that the superfluous humidity of Water may rial u rally and im- 
perceptibly dry up, and the flame go up and down in the Mercury that has 
been properly cooked. Everything depends on the "regimen of fire/' ac- 
cording to Philalethes (Le filet d 7 Ariadne, Paris, 1695, p. 75). He adds that 
"without fire, the matter (= ^) is useless and the philosophical mercury 
remains a chimera living only in the imagination. " Kremmerz equally claims 
that the "initiate is not such if he does not control ihe power k> nourish in 
himself a center of astral activity that can be turned on at will in his inner 
fluidic body." 

At this point the conditions for any magical realization are virtually 
present. The magical act is the conception of a lightning- flash, a swift, opera- 
tion in which the mental power fixes the command or the conception of 
the goal and unleashes against it the ignified fluidic force $. This is called 



63. We may note here ihat the character of perversion of Isiac magic consists in the fat I 
thai lluu which in Lhe center and higher principle, 0, here becomes an instrument for a 
"projection" thai is commanded by lbe forces of the "being of desire"; instead of being 
lhe dHcrmiiriiigJfflafl^ as in the other type of magic, it is the determined, factor, doing 
violence 10 us nalure. ll is the conjunction in which the Moon dominates the Sun, and 
the female dominates the male. (Note by TJR) 



166 
THE SECOND PREPARATION OF THE HERMETIC CADUCEUS 

acting," This is why the Hermetists talk about the Work as a "woman's 
game" or as "child's play/ 1 thus confirming the teaching of the Kabbalnh, 
which in Arcanum XI of the Tarot uses as the symbol of Strength a woman 
who effortlessly closes and immobilizes the jaws of a furious lion. This is 
why it is improper to talk about "will" in magic, because will as conceived 
by men is characterised by tension, violence, rigidity, or exactly the oppo- 
site features favorable to magical realizations. One needs to fed superior 
not limited by obstacles, powerful and ready in spirit, dwelling in a state of 
perfect justice. This is the necessary basis for the calm, determined plating 
of the image, which is accurately defined in all its parts, in the mental light 
that needs to be ignified and gradually exalted until you reach the state of 
sympathy. It is in this state, as a pure act of spirit, that the sudden flash of 
"projection 1 * needs to occur. 

The magical equilibrium of all the conditions is an instant that you 
must be able to grasp without delay or fear. Tn ihe operations lot used on 
natural things, the astrological conditions, the ceremony, the weather, the 
time, the hour, the place, the formulas, the gestures, the perfumes, and all 
the other elements that need to be scrupulously observed should create an 
analogous connection of equilibrium and sympathy of invisible human 
and natural forces, which, being seized and fixed by the will, make it magi- 
cally and irresistibly operative. 

I do not think that until now you have been told about things of our Art 
in a more clear and precise way. If you know today how to understand all 
this in your spirit, and if this is your destiny; the winged shoes of Hermes 
are yours for the "marvelous adventure. 1 " 



Luce 

Instructions 
for Ceremonial Magic 



Preliminaries 



T, 



he instructions given up to this point, provided they have been fol- 
lowed with the great perseverance that is required in all operations of the 
Sacred Science, are now sufficient to lead to the practice of evocatory Magic, 
without the danger of excessive physical or psychic reactions that might 
turn out to be harmful. 

The ritual that we will explain step~by~step actually represents a path 
of realization that can be independent from the theurgical practices ex- 
pounded so far; thus, this path may be followed by anybody who is so 
inclined, without referring to those practices. I must advise you ; though , 
that it is useful to develop the two parallel systems in harmony 

As far as magical realization is concerned, it is necessary to first give 
some particular notions and some warnings. The ritual that 1 am discuss- 
ing here is an absolutely preliminary one, in preparation for more difficult 
operations that will be introduced in due course. This ritual must be per- 
formed with the highest degree of accuracy, following the instructions, 
pursuing with unwavering will the perfect realization of even the smallest 
details, including the apparently insignificant ones. 

I advise you that this ritual does not refer to a particular time of year, 
but can always be performed, as long as it is not interrupted, until the 
intended result is achieved, no matter how much or how little time it takes. 
The only essential variation, which will be explained in its place, is the 
combination of perfumes adapted to each constellation. 

Let me point out from the start that, in Magic, the divisions of the year 
do not correspond to the divisions of the secular year, but rather are calcu- 
lated astronomically and correspond to the sun's entrance into and exit 
from the separate constellations. Therefore, remember that our year be- 



187 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

gins on March 21, in correspondence to the sun's entrance into Aries and 
to the beginning of spring. 

However, since some months are more or less propitious, 1 recommend 
performing this ritual during the last month of fall and the three months of 
winter, in other words, from the last days of November all the way through 
the following March. 

The ritual is particularly fitting for an initial operation of empower- 
ment and illumination. The immediate objective is actualized by estab- 
lishing contact with higher intelligences 73 in order to receive an illumina- 
tion from them that can manifest itself in various ways: first of all, through 
the direct manifestation of the Being invoked, which then appears in a 
visible and tangible way to the practitioner, giving him specific instruc- 
tions that must be followed with intelligence. These instructions are some- 
times so complete as to be the only thing the practitioner will ever need to 
know. 1 mean this in an absolutely holistic way, in reference to every kind 
of individual activity (both in matters of mere knowledge and in all that 
concerns experiences or instructions for personal development) , as well, 
as often happens, as what may be pertinent to the practical life contingent 
to every individual. 

Another form of manifestation is the intelligent correspondence with 
the being invoked, realizable during the same invocation or, more often, 
when the invocator is asleep. One needs to be cautious when judging such 
manifestations, in order not to create illusions or fancies that could lead to 
dangerous deviations. On the contrary, it is better to entirely suspend any 
kind of judgment until one attains a state in which there can no longer be 
doubt as to their origin. This sense of certainty cannot be communicated, 
but only experienced. 

When the communication occurs in this form, the greatest difficulty is 
to clearly remember when waking up, and afterward, whatever has been 
perceived or heard during the night. In other words, to transport the state 
of lucid consciousness during sleep into the lucid consciousness of the 



73. It is necessary to remember that in the order of ceremonial magic, to which the 
following instructions by Luce are addressed, the practice itself causes metaphysical 
states of being to assume objective and personalized forms, almost as if they were 
separate beings (intelligences, angels, elementals, etc.). Obviously such experiences 
should not be considered to be definitive. (Note bv UR) 



188 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

waking state. This is accomplished by fixing the impressions received in the 
state that is no longer sleep, reaffirming them as one begins to wake up. 

The further objective of the ritual is connected to the problem that we 
have all posed from the start and that we have dealt with hitherto by sup- 
plying detailed instructions aimed at finding a practical solution to the 
problem of the Self in its totality; in regard to its essence — what the Self 
is — and its phenomenology — i.e., what the Self can do; how its action is 
manifested; and which reactions it has in the environment surrounding it, 
or in the universe, in which it becomes the focal point. We will take this 
general line of questions regarding the Self onto another plane of develop- 
ment, similar to the one that we have been following up to now This plane 
in fact leads to the same goal, the same fulfillment, but with an essential 
difference in method. 

Up to now, the instructions supplied were rather limited to what con- 
cerns a solar development of the acting principle, which, consisting in 
itself, or leaning as little as possible on a few external things such as per- 
fumes, develops its own principle and leads it to the highest degree of 
ignification. 

What I intend through these instructions is to begin from the state of 
consciousness proper to the majority of people, women included; these 
will be instructions that have as their immediate objective the develop- 
ment, knowledge, integration, and finally the solution of the lunar prin- 
ciple, up to the point at which conversion and transmutation occur. This 
does not mean that if an already established operates on this plane, it 
will be a disavantage; rather, it means a greater perfection in action and a 
greater speed in the various stages of the operations. The fusion of the two 
systems is certainly to be advised, since great advantages may be derived 
by reacting reciprocally on each other. 

The reader will remember (see the introduction to chapter I) that as a 
starting point we had asked the question; "What am J?" This problem is 
not solved by any theory or intellectual notion, but rather and only by an 
experience: namely by the experience of Being (hence God says in Exodus 
3:14: "Eith ascer Ei&h," "I Am Who I Am"). The ritual will lead a person to 
live in a radical way this incommunicable and absolute experience, until 
one attains a state of direct evidence transcending everything that may 
come from the human mind. 



189 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

In this regard we have already noticed that these instructions are ex- 
plained and must be accepted from an absolutely practical point of view. 
One should never ask why or seek an explanation or a "reason," but rather 
understand well, learn well, and perform well. These are the conditions. 
no discussions are allowed. 

We teach those who yearn to be born into the life of higher worlds and 
to take their first steps, gain control of themselves, acquiring the sense of 
the new realities that are manifested to them. Those who, before their time, 
want to take their own initiative may do so at their own risk and peril. The 
risks involved are like the ones incurred by a newborn who, without any 
experience or guidance, is left to himself in the course of daily events. 

Every form is the appearance of an intelligence. There are visible and 
invisible forms; known and unknown forms. 

Every form is the realization of a balanced force that acts in a particular, 
occult way that is coagulated in it. 

Every force is intelligence: it is spirit. 

Intelligences are arranged in a hierarchy. There is an intelligence in a 
grain of sand, in the infinitely small, which is hierarchically below the 
overall intelligence, which may be an organ. 

Thus, for example, among human beings there are elementary intelli- 
gent forces that preside over the organism, subject to a single one that in 
turn is subject to the intelligence presiding over the family; the latter, in 
turn, is subject to the Numen (protective spirit) of the city and so on. 

To fully understand all this and to begin to feel it is the essential condi- 
tion for the magical path. The Masters of this path speak in the Name of 
the Supreme Hierarch, from whom every illumination comes. 

Those who faithfully follow the instructions that I am laying out will 
certainly be able to attain sublime heights one day and receive the "royal 
crown. }1 

Thus, let experience be the starting point of departure and the support 
of every consideration. Slow down your thoughts: never express your opin- 
ion about something you do not know perfectly well. 

Man has the faculty to create and shape new forms, organizing them 
freely from "matter" or from the elements that constitute it. Or he may 
even act on the intelligent forces that always dominate this matter. 



190 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

However, the secret, ultimate, and highest meaning is in the power that, 
through the mystery of the "virgin," provides the origin and justification 
for every creative act. 

Know that the word is a living reality that you create, and to which you 
supply a body and a life: it is a being that becomes emancipated from you 
and acts on its own. According to us, the word is not just a sound that 
comes out of the lips, but also gesture, thought, and all that is expressed 
by a being that is not immobile, closed, cold, or isolated. This too is a 
mystery, and yet it should be enough to understand what is your constant 
responsibility. 

In Magic your thought, your intelligence, and your will are mere in- 
struments of your strength and of your power that transcends them. 

You must learn to know in an experimental way according to the natu- 
ral order of the proper reactions, what is their constitution and how, by 
means of their exercise, their use, and a constant, tenacious, uninterrupted 
training, through symbol and ritual action, they help to strengthen the 
principle from which they emanate, up to a limit that transcends every 
imagination and semblance of possibility 

You have been given the tools and the proper instrument. These are 
your principles and your methods: operate in this fashion. 

As you operate according to the precepts, know the direct result of the 
operation; by studying this result on the basis of the law of equilibrium of 
the opposites, you will know, from the effect, what has determined it. 

But this will be given you more fully at a later time. 

It is important that you clearly understand the classical concept of the 
triple world, which we call: 

— physical world 

— spiritual world 

— divine world 

The physical world is the world of form, the contingent world in which 
the universal forces are realized in a denser way. It is the world of impure 
matter and impure beings, inhabited by inferior elementals, ghosts, etc. 

The spiritual world has been designated by some people with the term 
"mental." It is the reign of spirits who dominate and organize "matter." 
Among them there are also the real elementals and the Intelligences. 



191 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

The divine world is inhabited by the Gods, who are the origin and the 
determining element of other subordinated worlds. They are free power 
and will, which is realized perfectly in immediate actualization. 

You will know the physical world by observing its organization and 
phenomena and by studying the external laws that sustain them. You will 
also come to know it in a better and more perfect way by penetrating the 
spiritual w r orld and correlating the two according to the law of harmoni- 
ous relationships. 

You will learn the secrets of the spiritual world when you overcome the 
barriers represented by the body by dominating it, overcoming it, some- 
times by excluding it, putting your intelligence in relation to the intelli- 
gences that preside over that world. 

You will penetrate the mysteries of the divine world provided you be- 
come worthy of a divine spirit to manifest itself directly to you and en- 
lighten you, or by "knowing" the Gods yourself, as long as you can elevate 
yourself to their levels acquiring their power for yourself. 

Remember that in the three worlds, the law of analogy reigns supreme, 
which is also the law of equilibrium. Know that the mystery of one world 
can reveal the mystery of another, as long as you understand and realize 
the relationships of "sublimation" or of "condensation" in a manner ad- 
equate to your purpose. 

Remember, though, that this triple division, which 1 have just explained, 
does not have a merely hierarchical value. In order to intuit what is the 
complex system of the hierarchy of beings, just look at the hierarchies of 
human society and of natural beings 5 and draw an analogy with the invis- 
ible world. 

I have mentioned the existence of an absolute law, namely the law of 
equilibrium. I would like to emphasize that it mles not only in the opera- 
tions of the Art, but in life as well, since it is in life that equilibrium achieves 
its perfect and unique realization. 

Equilibrium is life and is in life, in every act, in every essence, in every 
power, in every possibility and in every reality. 

You have surely heard and read about this law before. But maybe you 
have not asked the question that needs to be asked, in order to be able, if 
not to know, to at least intuit what it represents in our practice. Through 



192 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

this law we determine if the agent or the reaction, or both, is active; in the 
latter case, we determine the new element on which they act. 74 

Those who know the numerical symbolism may attempt to solve this 
by meditating on this strange recipe "to fix Mercury," which we transcribe 
from an ancient manuscript. "Of different things, take; 2-3 and 3-1; 1 and 
3 make 4; 3,2 is 10; between 3 and 4 there is a 1; 3 from 4 is 1; 1 from 3 is 
2. Between 2 and 3 there is 10 1,1,1 and 1,2,2, and 1,1, and 1 to 2, So 1-1, 
I have told you ever)?- thing." 

Coming back to the practical magical realization, I am warning you 
that the result of this operation may be attained both through "reflection" 
(more will be said about it when dealing with "magical chains") and through 
"plastic coagulation." in the astral "matrix." This matrix is organized in such a 
way as to generate different forms, which, in turn, by separating from it, 
perpetuate themselves in the form of life that has been assigned to them, 
which has a double essence: one active, creative, and actual; the other 
passive, generating, and plastic. 

Moreover, remember that in the operation it is necessary to determine 
exactly the purpose that one is attempting to achieve. This act already has 
the power to establish a determining and efficient relationship between 
the operator and the act that he has carried out by performing the ritual. 

It is also necessary for you to have a certain knowledge (acquired both 
through experience and a well-established concept in you), of the X you 
want to contact or on which you want to act in order to achieve your goal. 
Finally: act appropriately, according to the forms ritually prescribed. 

Practice will gradually teach you what degree of intensity, concentra- 
tion, or "projection" is appropriate for each goal. 

Always be aware that for every action there is a corresponding reaction 
of like intensity that reestablishes the equilibrium, which is not stagnancy, 
but rather a gradual shift on infinite planes of forces. 



74. We may note the very close analogy that exists between what in Magic and in the 
order of active interiority is the "law of equilibrium" and that, which in modern physics- 
is that law of "symmetry" which in the order of phenomenal considerations has replaced 
the principle of causality and sufficient reason. The "sufficient reason' 1 of a phenomenon 
is reduced today to an w a-symmetry" — just like, in the other field, the intervention of a 
being or an influence in an operation is the alteration or transformation of the equilib- 
rium or inner neutrality tn the course of Ehe same operation. (Note by UR) 



193 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

Understand this, and know how to realize it with wise prudence and 
gradually, all the way to the top. Be aware that a mistake on your part can 
bring about the worst consequences for you or others. 



The Ritual 

[Time] — This ritual, in preparation for greater operations aimed at at- 
taining enlightenment, may be performed during any time of the year, and 
it must be carried out until its realization is sufficient and adequate for 
further rituals. 

It is however opportune, as I have already said, to perform the ritual 
during winter and in the last month of the preceding fall, namely from the 
last days of November to the following March 20. During the periods of 
waxing moon it should be performed completely; during waning moon it 
will suffice to keep the lamp burning and to burn the perfumes, as will be 
shown. As far as women are concerned, during their menstrual period and 
the three days preceding it and following it, they are not to perform the 
ritual or enter the room. They will recite the purification prayer in the 
morning and in the evening, following the ablutions. 

[Food] — You may only eat vegetables, milk, and derivative products. 
Refrain from alcohol or similar stimulating substances. You are only al- 
lowed a little tea or coffee. Maintain absolute chastity of body and mind. 

If it is possible, keep food to a minimum, even suppressing your appe- 
tite or replacing it with astral nourishment, from which, as I have said 
elsewhere, you will greatly benefit. 

It is good to drink plenty of water. 

[Allocation of timel — Get up early in the morning, before sunrise, 
and immerse yourself in flowing water; then dress in the proper clothes 
and perform the ritual. Having done that, go about your business until 
sunset, when, after performing the ablution again, you will again perform 
the ritual before going to bed. It is important to move the time of breakfast 
between 10 and 11 a.m., and dinner between 4 and 5 p.m. 

[Clothing] — Wear a loose, completely white garment of pure linen; 
also wear a linen belt around your waist. Your shoes should be of the same- 
material. 



194 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

When dressing, after the ablution, recite the proper oration, which I 
will teach you later. 

[The room] — Obtain a large room, underground if possible , which 
you will retain exclusively for the performance of rituals. The walls should 
to be white, red, violet, or light blue. The floor needs to be cleaned with 
flowing water. The room should be square, or round; it should not have its 
door on its eastern side. Moreover, you should be aware of the locations of 
the four cardinal points. 

[The brazier and the lamp] — Obtain a lripod> about one meter high, 
in which you will light a fire with pine and laurel wood; then burn the 
right perfumes in accordance to the laws of days and constellations given 
elsewhere. You also need another tripod, which will be closed at the top, 
with a hole in which you insert a wick. Inside it put some virgin olive oil. 

The lamp must burn uninterrupted for the entire period of the operations. 

[The operation] — After performing the ablution and putting on the 
linen garments, enter the room, light the fire and the lamp, and burn some 
perfumes. 








195 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CEREMONIAL MAGIC 

Then draw in the center with gold 75 an equilateral triangle, with the ver- 
tex pointing to the East; then inscribe in it a circle. Draw toward the east, 
west, north, and south (in this order) the signs indicated in the table. Place 
the tripod eastward, on the right, and the burning lamp on the left. 

Position yourself in the middle of the circle, facing eastward, and burn 
more perfume; concentrate on the spirit and recite with clear voice the 
invocation of the solar Archangel that you will find in the Peter of Abano's 
Magical Elements.™ 

I will give you more instructions later. In the meantime, those who 
want have enough with which to begin. 



75. The signs can be traced with either the tip of a sword that has been magically 
consecrated; or with "magnetized" water, charcoal, or oil; or just with the index finger of 
the right hand with "gold," namely with the mind fixed on the solar principle so that 
they may be imparted a "direction of efficacy." In regard to the effective golden tint, see 
its recipe and ritual of composition in the Enchyridion of Leo III fed. A, Fidi, Milan, 1924, 
pp. 95-97). (Note by UR) 

76. 1 swear and confirm over you the strong and holy Angels of God in the name of 
Adonai, Eye, Eye, Eya who is who was, is and will be, Eye, Abraye; in the name of 
Sadday, Cados, Cados, Cados, who sits on high above the Cherubim, and in the name of 
the same mighty God who is powerful and exalted over all the Heavens, Eye, Seraye, 
who shaped the centuries after creating on the first day the world, the heavens, the earth, 
the sea and all the things that are in them, and sealed them with his holy name Phaa; 
through the names of the holy Angels, who rule in the fourth host and serve in the 
presence of the most powerful Saiamia, a Great and honored Angel; and through the 
name of the star which is the Suti and through his sign, and through the immense name 
of the living God and through all the names, I summon you, Michael, O Great Angel, 
who are in charge of the day of the Lord; and through the name of Adonai } the God of 
Israel, who created the World and what is in it, that you may work for and fulfill every 
petition of mine, according to any will and wish, to any benefit and cause. 



Ea 

The Doctrine of the 
immortal Body " 



T, 



he initiatic teaching concerning immortality is not without relation to 
the doctrine of the triple body, which I will now briefly discuss. 

First of all, the term "body" is taken analogically, to designate the "seats" 
that consciousness may assume, according to a possibility which, how- 
ever, transcends that of the overwhelming majority of human beings. Hence 
such a doctrine, like all esoteric doctrines, is true only in an initiatic con- 
text To speak of it in relation to ordinary man has no sense at all; for him 
there are no three, or seven, or nine "bodies," or however many are fancied 
by Theosophy, but simply the human state of consciousness, conditioned 
by its relation with the physical organism that everyone knows. 

This organism can be seen, felt, described, and sensed by common man, 
but in reality he does not know anything about it (in our sense of "know- 
ing"). Just as he does not understand the power due to which an arm can 
be moved at will (he may become aware of it in the event of a semiparalysis 
or a nervous illness), likewise he does not understand the power through 
which the heart beats. Thus, to common man, the body remains for the 
most part an unknown, enigmatic entity into which he mysteriously awak- 
ens and to which he finds himself connected. 

Conversely, those who should jind the way to shine a light in this deep and 
mysterious zone would develop a "knowledge" oj the various bodies discussed 
by esoterism. These bodies, 1 wish to say from the start, are not other bod- 
ies, but rather other ways to live than which is commonly understood as a 
body. They are so many phases of the Great Work. 

We have shown (chapter V) that real survival after death depends on a 
consciousness that has isolated itself and endured without the support and 
the condition of the psychophysical organism. Those who have been able to 
do so are virtually "beyond the waters"; the failing of consciousness, there- 



197 
THE DOCTRINE OF THE "IMMORTAL BODY 1 ' 

fore, is a fact of little consequence to them. I have also mentioned the possi- 
bility of aiming at pure liberation. The way leading to it lies in becoming free 
from all real and possible determinations, from conquest to conquest, from 
nudity to nudity, until the garment falls away through an absolute integra- 
tion into "selfhood," Then the formula "ego sum" (I am) is overcome, as the 
"sum" (am) becomes resolved into "est" (is). This is the point of the "Su- 
preme Identity" the Buddhist nirvana, and Flotinus's "One. 1 ' In Hatha Yoga 
it is said; "Empty as a vase in the air — full as a vase in the ocean," 

Aside from this, there is the magical possibility of those who, having 
realized detachment, reestablish contact with the manifested world, in- 
tending to entirely assume and master, in all of the elements and processes, 
the form that acted as a basis of their human life. The action here shifts to 
that which could be called the "corpse" — hence in Chinese tradition the 
expression "the solution of the corpse" designating the Work. However, in 
virtue of the essential relations connecting macrocosm and microcosm, 
such an action works on the hierarchies that command the various ele- 
ments of nature in general. 

As a starting point, we need to emphasize that the individuality of the 
overwhelming majority of people is a fiction, their very unity being a ficti- 
tious and precarious unity of a mere aggregate of forces and influences that 
in no way can be said to belong to them. Abraxas (chapter I) has already 
pointed this out. 

The forces on which man depends are first of all of a psychic order, and 
second of an organic order. To the first is connected everything that is 
related to passions, feelings, beliefs, natural affections, traditions, blood 
ties, and so on. Ordinary man should never say, "I love," but, "Love loves 
through me." As the fire manifests itself in individual flames when the 
necessary conditions are present, likewise love (or better said, the being of 
love) manifests itself in individual beings who love with a love that tran- 
scends and transports them, in relation to which they are more or less 
passive. The same applies to hatred, fear, piety etc. Nor is that all: every 
nation, every religion or traditional institution has its own "being"; the 
instinctive and deep reaction against an insult to one's country faith, or 
customs is the reaction of such beings and not, as it is commonly assumed, 
an individual reaction, proper to a distinct and autonomous Self. 

Much less so is one truly a real individual as we descend into the depths 



198 
THE DOCTRINE OF THE "IMMORTAL BODY" 

of the organic being: circulatory; endocrine, and nervous systems, sleep, 
hunger, and so on. All this, in individuals, represents a transcendent and 
collective element, of which it is obvious that others, rather than the single 
Self, are the active and leading principle. The Self leans on all this, and 
neither is it nor dominates it. Thus its individual life is a mirage that en- 
dures until the dissolution of the contingent nexus of equilibrium that gives 
a relative stability and unity to its psychophysical being, and until the 
various aggregated forces are reabsorbed into their respective "beings." 
These beings are not to be found just anywhere: they exist in thoughts, 
actions, passions, creations, bodily functions, and organs of human beings. 
They invisibly permeate and direct most of what is called ordinary life. 

This is why he who really wants to live must first die, separating him- 
self from this melee of influences and dependencies, and making his own 
the principle of a life that is of itself, and, thus, immortal. The "initiatic 
death" establishes man in the first element of this new life against which 
death will be powerless. But if immortality is to be more than the mere 
extension of consciousness, and if this consciousness is to be articulated 
in forms of action and expression proper to both planes, then it is neces- 
sary for that free and supernatural element to communicate its quality to 
various principles and forces present in the human aggregate. This is the 
essence of the theory of the magical body or resurrection body. What needs 
to be done is to re-create one's body, to retrace its obscure and mystical 
process in virtue of which it organized itself (or better, was organized) and 
then lent to a Self; it needs tQ/be retraced from the perspective of the prin- 
ciple that defeated death and that is of itself. The following phases of this 
process consist in the contact established with various beings, psychic at 
first, and then cosmic (gods), who rule over human beings and who act in 
their bodies and in their minds. The initiate, in this order of operations, 
must reaffirm his autonomy from them, even subjecting himself to those 
forces that used to be present in his organism. The Gnostics' "vesture of 
glory" or "immortal body" replacing the "form of slavery," is the final con- 
secration of those who victoriously pass this series of tests, thus becoming 
wholly emancipated from the spheres of "fate" and from the dominion of 
the various "Rulers" or "Archons," 

The immortal body is first of all a simph body not composite, since the 
principle that pervades and entirely dominates it is simple; this principle 



199 
THE DOCTRINE OF THE "IMMORTAL BODY" 

replaces the multitude, often antagonistic, of influences and powers that 
dominated the human soul and body. 

One might say that it is made of consciousness and power; no longer of 
matter. In fact, it is typical of traditional teaching to consider matter not as 
a distinct principle, coexisting with the spirit, but as a form or state, ac- 
cording to which the only reality namely the spirit, experiences itself. It is 
simply that which is inert, passive, and unconscious in the spirit; as such, 
it may always be "resolved" or "reduced," and this is precisely the case of 
the "magical body." As an analogy, think of what happens in the so-called 
"ideomotoric reflexes": if one assumes a state of complete relaxation and 
creates a vivid and fixed image of one's arm rising up, one will in fact end 
up with a raised arm, in virtue of a direct power produced by that image, 
without making any conscious effort. Now imagine something similar for 
the whole body: namely that the entire body, in the intimacy of its fibers, in 
all of its organs, functions, and movements, is assumed in the mind through 
an absolute and radiant image. Then the body would no longer exist as 
body; as its substance and basis it would only have this magical image: it 
would be a body directed, moved, and vivified by the mind. Its organs 
would be resolved in symbols or shaping ideas, which are the astral "sig- 
natures" or "names" of the beings to which they correspond. Hence, the 
name of manomdydkdya (body made of mind) given in the East to the 
"immortal body" also called m&yctvi-rupa, or "apparent form." 

The reason for this expression is clear. At this point it is the body that 
leans on the Self, rather than the other way around. If the Self should fail 
even for an instant, the body would collapse into nothingness. The Self 
has now taken the body upon itself, sustaining and commanding it, in the 
power of its own mind, just as ordinary consciousness does with an ordi- 
nary thought. To withdraw its image, to stop thinking it, would amount to 
make it disappear, without leaving behind a corpse (this operation was known 
in Taoism under the name of s'i-kiai, "the solution of the corpse"). 

In this chapter we talk about the symbol of "salt," which, in Hermeti- 
cism, usually designates the body or the physical element. The salt is the 
fixed, or the "necessary" element, the quality of that which resists "Fire" 
and cannot be changed. Prison of the sleeping Sulfur, its "awakening' 1 pro- 
duces a virtue that reacts on it, turning it into a volatile — in other words, 
into a way of being characterized by freedom and by transformation of air. 



200 
THE DOCTRINE OF THE "IMMORTAL BODY" 

Likewise, the Gnostics' "vesture of glory" was identified with the "body of 
freedom" (a term borrowed by St. Paul); its equivalent in Mahayana Bud- 
dhism is nirmdnakdya, an expression that can be translated as "body of 
transformation." In other words, the regenerated body, more than a body 
is a power; or better, it is the body in the state of power. It coincides with 
the free possibility of manifesting itself in a body, but not necessarily in 
this one exclusively nor only on the earthly plane. The faculty of word is 
mine, insofar as 1 can shape it and manifest it as I please, or even suspend 
it in silence. The initiate who has devoted himself to these applications 
finds himself in an identical relationship with his own body: he does with 
it as he pleases. He can project it in one form or in another, make it appear 
or disappear, without himself undergoing any transformation. This is why 
in the Hellenistic mysteries we find the expression seminarium (from the 
Latin semen = seed) designating the magical body: this is not a particular 
and fixed body but rather the active possibility, the seed for infinite bodies 
susceptible in theory to be shaped and "projected" by the mental sub- 
stance through a congruous transformation. 

This should not make us think that the magical body is unreal because it 
is apparent (nidydv'i-mpa). Everything that is said about it does not refer to 
the visible physical qualities of such a body, which, in this regard, could also 
be identical, in a particular apparition, to some human and mortal body It 
refers only to the function, transformed from passive into active, from nec- 
essary to free, according to which all these qualities are now subordinated to 
the central power. The fact that a thing falls under my power does not make 
it unreal, but rather supremely real. A body in which there is no longer 
"matter" and which is therefore "apparent" or "mental" simply signifies a 
body in which there is nothing left that resists the spirit, and which is simply 
given to the spirit: thus a perfect act. The transformation is not material but 
substantial — in the sense in which this term is used in Catholic theology 
when, in reference to the Eucharist, the identity and preservation of sensible 
attributes are retained in the Host, which nevertheless undergoes an essen- 
tial transformation. It is a transitbstantiation that occurs. 77 



77. Alchemical Hermelicism knew the saying: "Transmutemim de lapidibus morluis in 
vivos lapides philosophicos" (Transform yourselves from dead stones into living philo- 
sophical stones). The "stone" was a recurrent symbol for the human body. In Tkeatrum 
Chemicum (1602, 1, p. 267), the alchemist Peter Bonus wrote: "The ancient alchemists 



201 
THE DOCTRINE OF THE "IMMORTAL BODY 1 * 

The magical body is invulnerable and immortal; only what is composed 
and dependent is liable to alteration and corruption, 78 This body can prop- 
erly be called vajra, namely "diamond-thunderbolt," something almost 
adamantine, incorruptible, made of power and fulminating light. In neo- 
Platonism, the tf igneous body" or "radiant body" of the immortals has the 
same meaning and is connected to an analogous doctrine. 

Finally, to think of a place and, at the same time, to be in real, effective 
presence in that place and in that time, 79 is not a miraculous virtue, but 
rather a natural one for a body that is absorbed by the mind (or for what of 
it has been absorbed by the mind) and sustained only by its own image. It 
is where the mind is. 

In regard to details, the "immortal body" has also been called "triple 
body 1 ' He who is endowed with it is called "Lord of the Three Worlds." 
The starting point, technically speaking, is the state of "nakedness" that is 
realized through the initiatic death and transferred from extra-bodily states 
to the earthly state of the initiate. 

The first operation consists in shifting to a direct relationship with that 
of which the world of thoughts, representations, and emotions constitutes 
a simple, attenuated, particular reflection. For this purpose it is necessary 
to proceed to the "extraction of Mercury" This process is first of all the 
realization of the "subtle" or "fluidic" state that acts as a mediator between 
the two worlds; that of sensible exteriority and that of solar immanence. 
Through this state it is possible to establish contact with the deep forces 



knew through their art about the approaching end of the world and the resurrection of the 
dead. For the soul [through the Hermetic work] is connected again, for all eternity, to its 
original body. The body becomes totally glorified and incorruptible, incredibly subtle, 
penetrating every density. Its nature will be both spiritual and bodily. Ancient (Hermetic) 
philosophers have seen the Last Judgment in this Art, namely in the germination and in the 
birth of their stone. In it occurs the reunion of the soul ready to be glorified with its 
original body, in an Eternal glory.*** (Margarita pretiosa in Manget, II, p. 20ff.) 

78, Hippocrates said: "If man were one he would never be sick, 11 and rt It is not possible to 
find the cause of sickness in that which is one.' 1 ' De Maistre, after quoting these lines, 
rightly adds: "Such a luminous saying applies as well to the moral domain." (Sur Its 
sacrifices, 1924, II, p. 288) 

79. To make this possibility comprehensible in all its scope, it is necessary to go beyond 
the linear and realistic view of time. More on this will be said in the next chapter in 
regard to the phenomenon of precognition. (Note by UR) 



202 
THE DOCTRINE OF THE "IMMORTAL BODY" 

that are chained within the human organism, and eventually in the blood 

system, in the glandular system, and in the reproductive system, which have 
this double correspondence; 1) animal kingdom, plant kingdom, and min- 
eral kingdom; 2) dreaming state, sleeping state, state of apparent death (see 
chapter V). In order to clarify this correspondence, I will say that the sym- 
bols or "names" that awaken by transforming into superconsciousness what 
for ordinary people is the dreaming state reveal the "types" of various animal 
species, namely the beings that dominate the various animal species, of which 
the single individuals are like "corpuscles" of their "bodies." Such are the 
so-called sacred or living animals (usually made to correspond to the twelve 
signs of the zodiac), which the initiate "marries," in other words, "possesses," 
sealing his own body with this "marriage." The same can be said for the 
other two stages, in the last of which appears the creative original force, or 
dragon (which the Sepher Yetsirah places "at the center of the universe, like 
a King on his throne"), Sacred Fire, "Ur," or kundalinl Moving through the 
various "centers," it actualizes the septenary hierarchy (seven planets, seven 
angels, etc.) and this means to extend the "magical resurrection of the flesh" 
to the transcendental plane, thus making it absolute- 
Then it begins by reassuming the world of forms and finite beings subject 
to generation and corruption, namely the caused or generated world; corre- 
spondingly, to employ Mahayana terminology, it causes to shine the 
nirmctnak&ya, the magical or apparent body capable of transformation and 
appropriate action. Second, it reassumes the intermediate world of "element- 
ating elements," of that which has form and that which does not, of the 
"spiritual sound"; correspondingly, it is the essence made of fullness, of free 
enjoyment, of radiance of the sambhogak&ya, an invisible, purely intellec- 
tual "body." Third, it reassumes the world of illumination and "emptiness" 
that simultaneously is and is not, that is uncontaminated, transcendent; cor- 
respondingly it actualizes the dharmakdya, or supreme "body" made of law; 
which is associated with the Vajra-dh&ra, the inconceivable "Lord of the Scep- 
ter," also known as svabh&vak&ya, namely the pure mode of what is in itself. 80 
But this body, which is one and triple, is the same "immortal body" of 
the "Lord of the Three Worlds." 



80. On the Mahayana doctrine of the tirk&ya or "triple body" cf. L. de la Vallee Poussin, 
"Studies in Buddhist Dogma," in journal of the Asiatic Society, 1906, pp. 943M; P 
Masson-Oursel, "Les trois corps du Bouddha," Journal Asiatique, May 1913; G. R. S. 
Mead, in Theosophical Review, vol. 39, pp. 289ff., and in The Quest, 1909, vol. 1. 



De Pharmaco Cafholico 

(On the Universal Medicine) 



Consule te ipsum, noscas temet, et ambula ab intra. 
(Take your own counsel that you may know yourself, and walk within.) 



i 



t is not without some hesitations that we introduce the readers to an original 
text oj alchemical Hermeticism. The readers already know that the "alchemy" 
discussed here is not at all the infant and superstitious early chemistry, but 
rather the coded exposition oj an initiatic teaching. In Master Giovanni 
Braccesco's Espositione di Geber philosopho (Venice, 1551, j 77 b), we are 
warned: "Do not be deceived and do not believe literally the Philosophers oj 
this science, jor where they have spoken most openly, there they have spoken 
most obscurely, namely through enigmas or similitudes." Thus our readers must 
remember that, generally speaking, every substance (salt, sulfur, niter, etc.) 
mentioned here is also a symbol of states of consciousness and of fluidic forces, 
and that the relative operations indicate first of all the transformations that 
must be performed through initiatic realization. 

The whole problem lies in interpreting the symbolism; this is difficult both 
because it permeates alchemy and because it is very complex and varied, as 
well as requiring a truly subtle power of intuition. In the footnotes we will 
clarify the more important points. However the readers should refer to the 
previous essays by Abraxas, Luce, and P. Negri, and also read the text many 
times with patience and intelligence, Julius Evola's The Hermetic Tradition 
may also be helpful, since in that work the hermetic-alchemical symbolism is 
systematically explained. 

What we are publishing here is not the unabridged version of De pharmaco 
catholico, but rather a synthesis made by its own anonymous author This 
synthesis occupies pages 62-73 of the original edition found in the Chymica 
Vannus, which was published in Amsterdam in 1666. 

The following is the first direct translation from Latin, done by a friend of 
ours who has assumed the pseudonym Tikaipos. 



204 
DE PHARMACO CATHOL1CO 

Know first of all that everything was formed and made from three es- 
sences, similarly and analogously in the body through astral impression 
and elementary operation. The elements are found in the metals — not the 
metals in the elements — insofar as the seed of the metals is not found so 
far off as many know-it-alls have fancied, 91 Even though the elements, in 
the formation of any body must cooperate together, they are still not the 
philosophical Prime Matter, or that Astral Seed. However, they are cause of 
generation and of corruption, and the corruption of one thing is the gen- 
eration of another. 

According to the ancient philosophers, all things have been created by 
hatred and by love, by attraction and by repulsion (id est ex sympaihia ct 
antipathia), as by two qualities that are mutually contrasted in the Ele- 
ments, when performing this operation, through a heavenly influx or 
through a specific astral impression, etc. In every mineral or metal are 
incorporated the Elements, from which it derives its specific characteris- 
tics. The opposite qualities through which every existing thing is con- 
ceived and born, are two and only two: Fire is the hot-dry element and 
Water is the cold-humid element opposed to it. Air is hot-humid and its 
opposite element is the dry-cold Earth. 81 Since there is no other body to be 



81. The "metal" symbolizes that which in the mass of the "earth" is more individualised. 
In a wide sense, it indicates the human individual; more specifically, having identified 
the earth with the substance of the human body the metal corresponds to various organs 
and plexuses found in the human body. The seed or sulfur of the metals is therefore the 
deep, original power of organization and individuation^ namely the same power that 
gives form and life. This power should not be imagined to be far away in the "heavens/' 
but it is immanent and can be individuated and dominated through the Art, thus 
becoming the "magical philosophical fire/* Metals, as Philalethes says (Filet d* Ariadne, 
Paris, 1695, p. 27} , which are dead from the time they are taken from the mine [or earth; 
this separation represents the differentiation of living consciousness in various individu- 
als], are revived in their seed and thus are led to a resurrection: this is the Universal 
Medicine. According to Sendivogius (De sulfu.ro, Venice, 1644, p. 190): "In order to do 
the Philosophers 1 work, it is necessary to extract the metallic soul. Having done that, it 
needs to be purified and returned to its body, so that a real resurrection of the glorified 
body may occur. 1 * 

82. It goes without saying that these elements are not the physical ones, but rather forces 
that are known only as states of consciousness: not the Mead" and "vulgar" elements, as 
the alchemists say but the living ones. Knowledge of things in function of them is magical 
knowledge, or the sacred physics as opposed to the phenomenal and profane physics. 



205 
DE PHARMACO CATHOL1CO 

found outside these four Elements — and since they are incorporated in all 
things — this is the source of contrasts in any element. For these reasons, 
everything under the sphere of the moon is perishable and subject to de- 
cay When within a single subject two contraries coexist, an incessant struggle 
ensues, until one of the two parts is strengthened by its external element. 83 
Then the opposite force must withdraw, giving victory to the stronger one. 
What ensues is a certain decomposition or breaking apart of the entire com- 
pound, until a new form appears, generated through dissolution. 

The elements that constitute the metals are their three primordial ma- 
trices: Mercury, Sulfur and Salt, which are like opposites in constant ten- 
sion and struggle. Mercury, as an aerial spirit, is hostile to Salt, represent- 
ing the Earth. The warm Sulfur, as Fire, is the enemy of Water, and thus it 
too is hostile to Mercury's humidity. Mercury, in virtue of being the water 
of metals, represents two elements; Air and Water. These three matrices are 
nourished by our visible and tangible material constituents; they struggle 
in their mortal sojourn until the predetermined time when one of the con- 
stituting metals, having become too strong for the other, suppresses it, as 
nothing else comes to its aid, 84 And just like a man becomes gravely sick 
when one element predominates in him — in the case of sulfur, he first 



83. The "external element" is the corresponding cosmic element of the force that is 
present in an individuated manner in a particular body or being. 

84. The salt-earth corresponds to the body, which, in its inertia and material fixity, is a 
product of the interference and mutual neutralizing of the two fundamental opposing 
forces; the lunar mercury $ that represents the "astral light," the soul of things, the 
current of "waters" as a fluidic force (and thus water-air); against which sulfur $ is the 
active principle of the individual being, which, like its own body, has fixed and organized 
a certain quantity of cosmic energy. These two forces are precipitated in the body To 
extract them from it, to evoke them; then to dissolve the body in them and finally 
reassemble it by rearranging the two forces magically vivified, having led the two forces 
from a state of antithesis to a higher state of unity through the subtle hermetic power — 
this is how we could summarize the task of the Art. Then the body ceases to be matter 
and unconscious and becomes, as "philosopher's stone," the active and incorruptible form 
of the Self itself, a body of resurrection. 

The technical formula is ; Solve et Coagula, Potier {Philo&ophia pwra y Frankfurt, 
1619, p. 64) says: 'To dissolve is to convert the body of our Magnet into pure spirit. To 
coagulate is to turn this spirit into matter again, according to the precept of that 
philosopher who says: 'Turn the body into spirit and the spirit into body. He who 
understands these things has all things; he who does not, has nothing.*" 



206 
DE PHARMACO CATHOLICO 

loses fat, then flesh and even blood, and if we can not fix the principal 
element and reestablish in him some opportune harmony, he will die 
(thus the doctor has to know what element is active and what element 
is deficient) — likewise, and not otherwise as happens in the microcosm, 
so it happens in minerals and metals. The latter, through the strengthen- 
ing of this or that element, suppress or oppress the contrary element, until 
decomposition and scission occur. 

Those who know how to and can indeed gather the metallic sulfur (as 
their soul or igneous character) through that magical philosophical Fire have 
indeed attained the glory of this world. This igneous character is twofold: be 
aware that just as the two constituents have two enemies that are the cause 
of their whole dissolution, likewise the Wise have two constituents, or, rather, 
two receptacles of constituents (receptacula elementorum) through which they 
augment and reinforce one constituent or suppress its contrary. 

You have heard how the Philosophers — in the resolution of all metals — 
make use of contrary elements that I call the two fires: the sympathetic and 
hot hermaphroditic fire, and the cold metallic fire. The igneous element, or 
the soul of metals, is their Sulfur; the cold fire is that Mercury which is called 
the water of metals, and which is reduced through Salt. 85 

Remember also that all things must be dissolved through that from which 
they came and to which they will return: namely Mercury Sulfur, and Salt. 
The metals' Sulfur has its own Sulfur with which it needs to be strengthened 
and inflamed, so that it may retain dominion: this cannot be done before the 
Water gives in to Fire, namely the watery Mercury to its fiery Sulfur. 86 

Vulgar Sulfur and vulgar Niter are both efficacious fires, but mortal 



85. Readers should refer to the essay by Abraxas in chapter VI. The "hermaphroditic fire" 
is 5; the "cold fire" and the "water" in the body, the simple fluid state £? 

86. It is the "ignifi cation of the astral light" applied to the qualification of this light in the 
body s organs and in the body in general. This ignification is attained by putting the tf of 
these organs in communication with the Sulfur $; it is the first awakening of the /orcein 
the body, or of the body as force. Philalethes (Intro itus, ch. XI) says more clearly in this 
regard: "Passive Sulfur which is in "Mercury" should have been active and acting, From 
this we can see that it is necessary to introduce from elsewhere a principle of life, as long 
as u is of the same nature, awakening the life that is hidden and deathlike at its center. 
This active Sulfur is hidden in the innermost place in the house of Aries." Aries obvi- 
ously corresponds to the virile power of generation. In general, Sulfur is imagined 



207 
DE PHARMACO CATHOUCO 

enemies to each other. If you will know how to reconcile them (and through 
their igneous spirit, to light up the metallic Sulfur), nobody, besides God, 
will be able to stand in your way to attain health and wealth. 87 

Moreover, we can — through the multiplication of Salt — decompose 
metals through mineral or tartaric salt; however, this does not help to ob- 
tain that metallic sulfur that is the soul of all metals. Thus one first needs, 
paying uttermost care, to grasp it through something similar to it: namely 
through that flaming Fire obtained from those two opposites called Sulfur 
and Niter, which are often called by the same name. 

In order for you to know the other Fire as well — the frigid metallic 
one — be aware that it is nothing other than Saturn's Mercury, which can be 
combined with the metals, and calcinated on the fire, through the igneous 
and double element mentioned before. 

Thus, you have received from me a transparent teaching that is very 
clear in all regards; namely, that the metals — due to a certain astral sidereal 
representation (sideream imaginadonem) and to an action of Elements 
(elementaremque operationem) — are all generated by Sulfur and Mercury; 
that through Elements the metals must be fed and live, and finally die — 



to be enclosed in an infernal prison, to which Mercury possesses the keys (Sendivogius, 
p. 196). Cosmic vision, immortality, and prophetic knowledge are the gifts that Sulfur 
bestows on those who know how to find it and free it. (See Maximus, "Brevi note sul 
Cosmopolita" in issues 4-5 of Ignis, 1925.) 

87. Niter <D is the dynamic, positive, masculine, and vehement polarization of the 
individual force, the opposite of which is the Salts Q stasis, inertia, and passivity. 
However, since in the text Niter appears as the opposite of vulgar Sulfur, in the latter we 
must recognize the more external, passional, and selfish form of individuality; to which 
Niter is opposed as a truly virile power. In this sense it is also called infernal salt, in 
which "infernal," besides alluding to purifying destructions (the connection of the. idea 
of purification with niter is also found in the Bible, in Jeremiah 2:22), also has the real 
meaning of "infernal," due to the fact that the masculine force reflects the original 
creative or taurine force (T, whose correspondence is the vertical of 0), located in the 
inferior centers of the human organism. What matters is to reconcile and to temper 
vulgar Sulfur and Niter. This is the overcoming of the tenacious animal. Self, without the- 
se use of individuality carried by it being simply destroyed by the opposite impetus. On 
the contrary, it joins with the latter in equilibrium and in a superior domain that will 
allow one to activate the metallic Sulfur, namely to evoke and awaken the deeper energy, 
thus succeeding in amalgamating it with the actual body or salt, according to the symbol 
of verdigris ®(= salt G + niter 0), as Oswald Wirth interprets it. 



208 
DE PHARMACO CATHOL1CO 

that is, to be reduced to their primitive being; that metals cannot be with- 
out Elements; and that, analogously, the Philosophers only venerate two, 
each one having its own enemy. Fire and Water, or Sulfur and Mercury, are 
these two elements; and all things were formed by them, through the me- 
dium of Salt. Everything therefore needs to be decomposed through Sulfur 
and Mercury and reduced to Sulfur, etc. These are those magical elements 
that decompose everything and reveal a new product. This is the first dry 7 
solution, which I have dealt with at length in the beginning. 

The second, the humid solution, is performed with Saturn's Mercury, 88 
which I have called cosmic soul (animam mundi); since Saturn is the first 
planet in Heaven and is called father of all planets, likewise the earthly Sat- 
urn is the first, and from it all metals originate. Therefore it can be found in 
all of them, and not without reason I have called its spirit "cosmic spirit." 

However, before going on at length about this solution, I must inform 
you earnestly once more that the Philosophers have not only two magical 
elements — two Mercuries and two Saturns — but also two metals. In re- 
gard to these two Mercuries I have promised to instruct you without com- 
plication or distraction on how to conduct yourself in such circumstances. 
Know therefore that when the philosophers talk about their Mercury, you 
should not think about ordinary Mercury, since theirs is a metallic Mer- 
cury and hot-dry rather than cold-humid, while ordinary Mercury is hot 
in all its being, and thus cannot be mistaken for philosophical Mercury. 89 



88. Since Saturn is the oldest planet, the Mercury of Saturn may be related to a primordial 
state and — since it is identified in the text as "soul of the world" — devoid of any individua- 
tion of the life-force. In the humid "solution," which according to the text, as opposed to 
the dry solution operated by the double or androgynous Fire (Sulfur + Niter =5), is 
obtained with Saturn's Mercury we may see a hermetic variation of the "humid" or 
dissolutive way in general, which opens the way to the water of the "Great Sea." 

89. The opposition between the two Mercuries and the two Saturns (the vulgar and the 
philosophical) may be reduced to the opposition existing between the qualification of 
fire as vulgar Sulfur and as Niter The element is assumed at first in its properly human 
form (psychological-animic), and at a later time as it awakens in "Hades," or in forces 
chained in metals or bodily organs, as they are in the pure, prehuman state, unpolarized 
and thus including opposite qualities (hot-dry and cold-humid = "frozen fire" and 
"burning water"). This is confirmed further down by the text, in referring vulgar 
Mercury to the germ of Silver, or lunar Mercury, while the philosophical Mercury is 
joined to the solar Sulfur regarded as metallic quality Ordinary human consciousness is 
lunar, namely reflected and living off reflections (consciousness of phenomena). 



209 
DE PUARMACO CATHOUCO 

Vulgar Mercury carries within it the seed of Silver. But the other Mer- 
cury receives it from the Creator of heaven and earth, the solar Sulfur, in 
the metallic form and property. It is therefore the solar Magnet, just as the 
vulgar Mercury may be called a lunar Magnet. The fact that this is so can 
be seen by Mercury with that half-moon with which the Wise have repre- 
sented it , discriminating it and cutting it off from the authentic solar Mer- 
cury (5). We can also recognize the two Mercuries from the vapor that 
constitutes their Sulfur; and it can easily be seen why they are volatile — 
fixed or fugitive — and how sooner or later they let themselves be subli- 
mated and precipitated; this is the living way to discern the two Mercuries. 

Moreover be aware that just as Nature generated two Mercuries — solar 
and lunar — in the same way we can prepare, through the Art, out of those 
two stable bodies a corresponding Mercury It is possible to obtain live Mer- 
cury from metalloids (exmediis metallis = by metallic means) like Antimony, 
Bismuth, and Arsenic, but simply for medicinal purposes; with the excep- 
tion of this excellent healing virtue of theirs, they should not be regarded or 
proclaimed to be philosophical Mercury, which is a universal solvent (men- 
struum) and is bom twice from Mercury — first from the lunar one and then 
from the solar one — and thus can rightly be called double Mercury 

It is possible to extract and to distill lunar Mercury from the Saturnine 
body, though with much effort; it has the same nature and property as the 
lunar Mercury, insofar as the Moon was generated through Saturn, And 
just as from Saturn one can extract lunar Mercury likewise from the mine 
of Venus it is possible to extract the warm solar Mercury, through Tartar 
and sal ammoniac. 90 Though the latter are held in great contempt, they 



90, At the beginning of the Chymica Vannus that accompanies this translated text we find 
the following sentence: "Fn cruce sub sphaera (9 = Venus) venit Sapientia vera" (The true 
Wisdom comes in the cross beneath the sphere). In Hermeticism, Tartar is connected to 
Chaos, to the philosophers 1 "matter" in the primordial, chaotic state, and it may allude to 
a particular method of "decomposition/' Basilius Valentinus defines it as that which 
dissolves the metals (cf. A.J. Pernety, Diet. Mytho-hcrmetique, Paris, 1758, p. 480), Here 
we possibly find an allusion to violent methods in order to activate the deep force of 
solar Mercury, which were concealed by other Hermeti cists under the symbol of 
"corrosive waters 1 ' and "strong waters": forms of inebriation and forms that are derived 
from a deep upheaval of the psychophysical organism. The extraction of the warm 
mercury from the mine of Venus may allude also to methods of sexual magic. 



210 
DE PHARMACO CATHOLICO 

need to promote this operation together. Mercury of cold Saturn and Mer- 
cury of warm Venus: he who will know how to melt them down into oil 
will gain the Universal Solvent, He will hold the key with which all the 
Sulfurs can be made potable. But let us return to our main point. 

Know that the Philosophers have two Saturns; under the aforesaid double 
mercurial spirit they understand those two Saturns from which this or that 
Mercury was extracted and their spirit distilled. Many have given the name 
of Gold to Lead and vice, versa; but I mean the philosophers* Lead, which 
has remained unknown to this day Analogously the other Lead may well 
be the philosophers 1 Lead, but it is not regarded as such by everyone — it is 
argentiferous, and so forth — while the auriferous lead is rarely found in 
metals (it is used in laboratories under an incorrect name); not much is 
made of it, despite its white and bright yellow color. In its great weight and 
psychophysical character (spirituale ac corporate) it may be compared to 
Arsenic, insofar as — being generated by Arsenic and by similar elements — 
it is in the same family And just as Arsenic is friendly to Arsenic, the same 
goes for this hidden and ancient Philosophical Lead. gi Since the ancient 
Sages have used only two metals in their Great Magistery I will limit my- 
self to them; in regard to both these metals of the Wise I will shed the light 
of my own experience. 

The Philosophers say that the first and the last metal are to be regarded 
as one and the same metal that can be used in the Art and for the making 
of the Universal Medicine. The first metal is the very sperm of the metals; 
from it, it is possible to bring to light in visible form the metallic fertilizing 
seed as well as Sulfur. We find this metal in the mine of Saturn, Root of the 
perfect metals, just as of the imperfect ones, it is endowed with a certain 
saturnine spirit and is manifested as the mine of Mercury. It is called Philo- 
sophical Lead or Philosophical Azoth, from which we are used to distil the 



91. "Philosophical Gold" is the regeneration of the "ancient and occult Lead 1 ' that 
corresponds to the element Salt or to the body (in esoteric physiology, to that which in the 
body has mineral character — i.e., the skeleton, just as Saturn-Lead is the heaviest among 
the elements). This is connected with the arrested "primordial virility" (the emasculation 
of Saturn), and on the basis of its Greek etymology the Arsenic, which is brought together 
with the Philosophical Lead of the text, refers exactly to this principle of virility. 



211 
DE PHARMACO CATHOLICO 

Virgin's Milk, and it has a venereal property; 92 The last metal is called "last" 
because it has attained a maturity of perfect finality: the finality of metals 
consists in their being Gold, beyond which Nature does not operate in 
metals, but must cease and desist there, unless the dominating Art comes 
to its help. The latter, in a short time (but not without the help of Nature 
herself), goes beyond until a certain transparent and diaphanous body 
emerges from the solar mass: this is what the Philosophers call "crystalli- 
zation' 1 (vitrificationem), and it is the highest and noblest thing Nature and 
Art can ever do and achieve. I can only briefly mention here how this 
crystallization must be prepared and performed. 

Take that magical igneous element that is composed, as though from 
Sulfur and Niter, of two opposed infernal materials. With this infernal blaz- 
ing Fire, begin on the border of Nature: attack and calcify those otherwise 
impregnable doors of the solar fort, namely Gold: thus one fire lights the 
other, one Sulfur the other. While this takes place, the element Fire domi- 
nates: that which in the solar compound is the second principle, inasmuch 
as the Fire in the Gold is called soul and Sulfur. Thus, when the Fire achieves 
victory, it is up to the element Water — namely to the humid and elusive 
Mercury — to fly toward its star. Since the mercurial spirit is the seat of the 
soul, and is called the link that connects soul and body, what arises out of 
it is a first separation and the splitting of soul and body. What needs to be 
employed for this is that cold metallic fire that is extracted from a certain 
mineral Saturn that has not yet been melted down, also known as the Mer- 
cury of Saturn. The latter, drawn out of that unfused and rigid Lead, does 
not burn: in other words, it does not run like ordinary Mercury, It has 
within itself a dry and earthly quality, thanks to which it can preserve the 



92. As far as the first metal as sperm of the metals (the primordial generating and 
individuating power) is concerned, the allusion to a "propagating seed," of which it is the 
visible manifestation, and the allusion to its "venereal quality" could indicate the 
relationship existing between this force and the power of sex. The Art draws from it a 
"Virgin's Milk," or a force that will nourish "him who is bora from a Virgin/ through 
"immaculate conception." "Nature" is able to produce that Gold which is proper to the 
intellectual and volitional principle of human beings. Beyond this, the "Sacred Art" 
needs to operate in order to remove the limit and the finiteness proper to this Gold and 
to produce the supreme fulfillment of consciousness and force. 



212 
DE PHARMACO CATHOL1CO 

solar Sulfur. Make sure that it does not get burned and that it does not fly 
away with its own Mercury. 93 

When Gold is amalgamated with saturnine Mercury it becomes a porous 
Gold. 94 Thus the infernal fire can calcinate that solid body better and faster, 
light up the solar fire throughout and thus reduce it to ashes. Then, through 
clear heavenly dew, we draw from it Sulfur. From the remaining mass, after 
a due reverberation, we lixiviate that most precious medicinal Salt of which 
the Wise have said, "Metallic salt is the Philosophers' Stone," Another Phi- 
losopher said: "Unless God created Salt, one could not make the Philoso- 
phers' Stone." But this Salt needs to be duly clarified with the spirit of wine. 
Having done that, it joins its Sulfur: and see, it is permeated by the cosmic 
spirit — that spirit which was distilled from saturnine Mercury — and it soon 
begins to putrefy and fixate in the same glass and furnace. 95 In this way the 
Great Work is completed until it reaches fermentation and increase; it is the 
universal medicine for all diseases. The souls of those who can use it are 
renewed and strengthened with every help they need . . . 

The benevolent reader will undoubtedly be puzzled at the clear and radi- 
cal teaching I have expounded so far: especially the teaching on that frigid 



93. This passage contains a wonderful synthesis of the Hermetic procedure, sufficiently 
explicit, "Gold" must here be understood as the purely personal and mental manifesta- 
tion in man of the solar principle, namely "vulgar Gold." It needs to be calcified through 
fire — in other words it corresponds, in the terminology of Yoga, to the "slaying of the 
manas" Alchemists call this phase mortificatio (mortification) and putrej actio (putrefac- 
tion), which is followed by the liberating action of philosophical Water. Thus Bernard of 
Treviso talks about a King who takes off his red (solar) garment and wears a black one 
before taking a bath. This is a shift to the subtle or fluidic state, corresponding to the 
separation from the physical state. When the subtle is in a free state, and when the dry, 
"cold metallic fire* intervenes, one can proceed to the magical fixing. According to 
Sendivogius (Novum Lumen Chemicum t Venice, 1644, Tract. V, p. 31), this amounts to 
freezing warm water and joining the spirit to it. 

94. The "porosity" of Sendivogius (ibid., Tract. X, pp. 50-51) is connected to the method 
opposite to the violent one. But here it seems that the two methods are united. Gold 
opens itself to "waters" and allows them to penetrate it in an initial "dissolution" and 
decomposition, which the infernal fire then brings to a deeper stage, until Gold, in its 
pure and absolute state, emerges from the decomposition. 

95. The saying "Unless there was Salt it would not be possible to make the Philosophers' 
Stone* is very important. From the material body, the Self draws the sensation of self; 



213 
DE PHARMACO CATHOUCO 

saturnine Mercury (and on that igneous-infernal magical element) with- 
out which nothing is worth learning in the entire alchemical science. The 
answer is this: even though I have put everything in clear sight (far too 
clearly for the experts), and in a more explicit way than any Philosopher 
has ever written about it, there are a few things that 1 have kept hidden: 
how it is possible to extract from a certain Saturn such an excellent and 
rare Mercury and how to reduce it to a red spirit. 96 This can be attained in 
one way only and through only one means. In regard to this 1 have given 
some hints: but those who will not be favored by God will not be able to get 
than and not even suspect their existence. 

Not only have I kept partially hidden this adaptation of the frigid me- 
tallic fire, but also the preparation of that igneous magical key that, as you 
have often heard, is obtained from two opposite fires striving against each 
other, namely Sulfur and Niter, These fires, though they may be rightly 
called infernal fires in mutual opposition, must become the same thing 
and produce together the same effect. In order to understand how to bring 
about this unification, ash God to illuminate your soul. 1 have done my part 
in this little work and revealed to you more than enough. The reason that 



thus it remains the basis on which one needs to work, perfecting, integrating, and 
illuminating ihe power that has produced it until that perfect body is produced, which 
was mentioned in the Mithraic ritual in chapter IV. This perfect body is identical to the 
so-called "spiritual body" or "magical body." 1 This is why the danger during operations is 
that Mercury may fly away, thus causing the fire not only to melt the metals, hut to 
destroy them as well. It follows that the Mercury required for the Work is not vulgar 
Mercury but a fixed Mercury; the fire required is not the strong one, but the subtle, 
androgynouSj and tempered one. The Hermetic seal of the glass or athanor is required. 
This seal prevents the volatile portion from escaping and from hitting the upper part, 
thus condensing again and falling on the saline residues that it has left, and reacting on 
them. This reaction occurs according to a recurring circle of new sublimations and 
precipitations that ends only when all the residues are resolved and the two {the higher 
solar consciousness and the body) have become one. Then the athanor opens and out of 
it flies the Phoenix: the self-generating and immortal animal. 

96. Saturn is the body: Mercury is related to the fluidic (= Moon) state that can be 
extracted from it, through which consciousness may enter into magical contact with the 
body itself. Red Mercury is $, or the fluidic state ignified through the real nature of Gold 
(= Sun). The latter comes to light in its turn only through immersion or solution of 
vulgar Gold in the first Mercury ^. 



214 
DE PHARMACO CATHOL1CO 

I have done this is love for my neighbor, whom 1 would like to encourage 
with my little experience and lead back on the straight path. ... It is also 
right that whatever is good be shared among all, or at least with those who 
have approached and dedicated themselves to the Philosophers and be- 
long to their number. For the other outsiders, everything takes place so 
that " [t]hey have ears but hear not, they have eyes but see not/' We will not 
cast pearls before swine, which do not care for them but besmirch them, 

I will add something only about this one point, which could cause you 
great hesitations, concerning the first and second Saturn, or Mercury. Be- 
fore you have heard; 1) from the Moon, and likewise from that frigid Sat- 
urn of Aries, it is possible to draw a certain Mercury, especially fit for the 
Philosophical Work; 2) from the mine of Venus it is possible to obtain a 
certain solar Mercury endowed of solar Sulfur, which I have called the 
"Mercury of the Sun," since it is employed to generate the Sun; 3) in spite 
of this, I have employed saturnine Mercury to break up the Gold. To the 
doubt that may ensue I will reply that we could employ red Mercury in a 
white lunar tincture. Just as one cannot travel from one extreme to the 
other without going through a middle point, likewise it is not possible to 
attain a red tincture without having first attained a white one. In this way, 
the benevolent reader can solve the problem by himself, and remember that 
here I have written only about the true and simple Universal and not about 
the most universal Universal. 

The most universal Universal (Universale generalissimum) is produced, 
as explained above, from a double Mercury; it is animated and fermented 
with solar Sulfur, coagulated with permanent golden Salt, and further aug- 
mented ad infinitum, both in quantity and in quality, thanks to the two 
other Sulfurs. Quality, as life (qualitas seu vita), feeds on Sulfur, and it 
increases with that aforesaid Mercury, which carries with itself not only 
the character and the power of a venereal property, but also the nature of 
frigid saturnine metal. It is therefore compared to a double Mercury — and 
is called duplicated Mercury — which has all the qualities; the quality of 
Venus, thanks to the hot Sulfur, and frigidity on the part of Saturn, The 
benevolent and sincere Lover of the Art would cast away any doubts and 
believe in the truth of my experience. In this way you will not be able to 
accuse me of lying, since I have not begged this out of other people's books, 



215 
DE PHARMACO CATHOUCO 

in order to procure for myself fame and respect; on the contrary, I have 
labored on it with the work of my hands, and it was only afterward that I 
realized what I should have known before. 97 

The fundamental mystery of the Wise, as I have expounded it above, 
and that I have summarized again here, needs to be understood by you, 
sincere Lover of the Art [tecnofilo]: for you must frequently and repeatedly 
read this summary of mine, over and over again, until you have been educated, 
both inside and out, on all things . . > 98 

In the meantime, my summary is over, limited to the two magical con- 
stituents of Solvent or duplicated Mercury, refraining from describing the 
medicine on the basis of the mineral kingdom. Thus welcome, with grate- 
ful heart, these fruits of my labors: magical elements, Solvent and Univer- 
sal Medicine (Catholicus), and First Matter, with which any metal may be 
led back to its three principles, and the true Potable Gold must be ob- 
tained. You could not wish me to have made clearer to you the First Mat- 
ter — and even both elements, including the igneous key — with such ex- 
plicit words and constant lucidity. 



97-98. The italics are ours. Let the reader of goodwill pay attention to these words, 
including those readers who may have become annoyed for not having understood 
much, despite our comments, from a first reading of the present text. 




VHI 



Abraxas 



Magical Operations with 
"Two Vessels'-Reduplication 



1 have mentioned the composition of the Caduceus that is performed in a 
single vessel: in the body and powers of the single individual. I have also 
added that effects of greater importance can be attained through the force 
of a magical chain, a natural spirit, or a Being, 

I will not discuss this yet, but only the magical composition performed 
in two vessels: that is, in two persons, in which the two components — the 
active and the passive, the Sun and the Moon, Sulfur and Mercury — are 
split in two, polarized and exalted separately 

Since there are two forms of Caduceus — one aimed at vision, which I 
instructed you on when discussing the Mirror (chapter III), and one aimed 
at power, which is obtained through the ignification of the astral light (chap- 
ter VI) — you will find here two operations: one is vision and relationship 
through a "pupil"; the other is preparation of the androgynous Mercury 
through fluidic intercourse. 

You need to understand from the start that as a general rule the igneous 
force predominates in a man, while the lunar force does so in a woman. 
Thus one can use two people of different sex instead of preparing both ele- 
ments in a single vessel. The usefulness of the procedure lies in the fact that 
in magical development you need first of all to give power and priority to the 
solar principle, and not open yourself to the humid, receptive, and volatile 
principle before you are perfecdy sound and sure of yourself: otherwise magic 
is transformed into mediumism and descends to passive ecstasy at a lower 
psychic level, if not even to some form of obsession. Now you can remain 
completely positive and closed if at first another being attempts to exalt the 
opposite quality; then, by creating a relationship with it you will be able to 
guide and to learn, and eventually even absorb and resuscitate it in yourself, 
having already acquired the necessary qualification. 



219 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH "TWO VESSELS"— REDUPLICATION 




It is good if the woman whom you will use in the works of vision and 
communication with incorporeal beings is a virgin. In the state of virginity, 
as long as this state is more than merely physiological, a group of subtle 
forces has not yet undergone the modification, the polarization, and the 
desaturation that occur through sexual intercourse in a normal relation- 
ship, and thus, besides their greater purity and intensity, it is easier to 
concentrate them in the direction of initiatic practices." Sometimes in- 
stead of women, children between seven and fourteen years of age are 
employed: during this age there are dominant subtle forces of formation 
and growth at a very energetic stage, and not yet altered by the vulgar 
Sulfur of the passional and emotional life of adolescents. 

The subject must undergo a preparation according to the directives pre- 
viously mentioned when talking about the Mirror. She should not be con- 
cerned with the active side of firmness, control, and stability nor the subtle 
dosage and mixture of Sulfur and Mercury She should only try to be open 
and receptive in every sense and from beginning to end, in other words, to 
extract and exalt exclusively to the highest degree, the principle £. She 
needs to overcome the fear of a complete abandonment. The absence of a 
solar principle is supplied by an absolute trust in the operator and in his 
strength, a total submission to him, conjoined with a sincere and pure 
aspiration toward supersensible reality 

It is necessary to build a correct environment for the practices, which 
needs to be chosen possibly in the countryside or in an isolated or subter- 
ranean place, in which silence reigns supreme and where nobody will come 
and be a disturbance. What is needed is a separate room, its walls painted 
white, with the strictly necessary, new, simple, and clean instruments. The 



99, Notice the double meaning of the words "eye" (pupil) and 'Virgin' 1 in the Greek term 
K6pn that you can find in the title of a classical Hermetic text (ic6pn Koa[40i> in Stob, 
Phys. XLI, 44-45)- Among some primitive populations, who know more about this than 
so-called "civilized 7 ' people, young virgin girls are believed to be filled with a dangerous 
and mysterious force, and they are kept "isolated" almost like electric condensers. 
Sometimes this is done in huts above the earth, or made in such a way that no part of 
their naked body touches the earth, until they are led to marriage, which "discharges" 
them (cf. Frazer, The Golden Bough, vol. Ill, ch. LX, sect. 3-5). 



220 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH "TWO VESSELS"— REDUPLICATION 

initial purification of the place needs to be done with fumigation of sulfur 
and by washing the floor with seawater or stream water; then, in the morn- 
ing and in the evening, a little incense, myrrh, and fruits of laurel. This 
place must be reserved strictly for you: you must not allow anyone else to 
come in, for any reason, much less those who are drawn by mere curiosity 
You will take the "pupil" there at the appointed time for practice. There 
you will use sandalwood as the dominant perfume, with very light doses 
of the planetary and zodiac perfume of the "pupil" herself. 

It is good to concentrate preparation during the period of a full moon, 
while on your part you will exalt the force of command. Complete chas- 
tity in body and mind. Healthy food, excluding meats. Physical and men- 
tal purity It is necessary to clearly isolate the "emotion 1 ' element in the 
"pupil," in order to obtain a limpid abandonment. The most propitious 
times are dry clear nights. 

This is how the operation proceeds: first of all, open the windows, burn 
the perfumes, and, facing east, namely toward dawn, pray — I mean: formu- 
late in a distinct way the idea and desire its realization with trust. The idea 
in the first place is that the darkening entities that dominate the senses 
and bar the thresholds should depart, and that the turbid ghosts contained 
within the soul should vanish. A formula, such as the following, is to be 
pronounced in a low tone, facing east, focusing the mind on every word: 

"Put to flight before Thee, Power of the rising Sun, the great night of human 
fever, of ghosts, the phantasms of pride, the larvae of concupiscence. You are 
Light. Let the Light be in me, on whom the yearning of earthly things no longer 
presses." 100 

It is not necessary that the "pupil" hear this invocation of yours; but 
she may formulate one herself, in tune with her soul, before sitting before 
the Mirror, which needs to be prepared as I have explained. You, while 
standing behind, as the fixation is established, realize a sense of total mas- 
tery over her, a sense of enveloping and controlling her: mentally com- 
mand the detachment of her sight, insert your strength in its "abandon- 
ment, in order to propitiate it and push it forward. Once the state of light 
is attained, invoke and formulate what you want to know, command her to 



100. This is a variation of a formula given by Kremmerz. The expression "pupil" is also 
Kremmerz's. (Note by UR) 



221 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH "TWO VESSELS 15 — REDUPLICATION 

see. The invocation may be addressed to the Sun, to the Seven Angels, or 
to a special Power that you know is connected to the thing that the opera- 
tion is aimed toward. You may find invocatory formulas in Agrippa and in 
Peter of Abano. The Third Logos of the Mithraic Ritual (chapter IV) is also 
efficacious. 

It is necessary for the "pupil" to almost lose her self- awareness through 
complete trust and penetration with your supporting strength, so that she 
will not oppose any reaction, and no manifestation may terrorize her and 
thus interrupt the operation. 

She will reveal everything she sees. Then you will direct her to a fur- 
ther vision. I will add that on the basis of the knowledge that comes to you 
thus, while the state of communication with the supersensible persists, 
you can cast spells and commands to the powers, dangerous as it may he 
during operations of this type. In any event, make sure that the spell will 
take effect at a later time and with a consciousness absolutely distinct from 
that which awaits the revelation. If during this waiting, instead of perfect 
neutrality there is a hidden desire to attain one particular content of a vi- 
sion instead of another, what will ensue is the mistaken image of the ful- 
fillment of this desire. 

Once you have attained a deep, effective relationship with your "pu- 
pil," her vision can be transmitted directly to you. 

If the operation does not succeed, keep at it, be silent and pray, repeat- 
ing it at the same time. 

One of the main obstacles is the "projection" of what Kremmerz has 
called similar natures. These are impulses and desires that have resisted 
purification — either in you or in the "pupil" — or which lie in ambush un- 
derneath the threshold of consciousness. These forces absorb the power 
that produces detachment and use it to project themselves, to externalize 
themselves in fluidxc beings. Evil therefore consists not so much in the fact 
that they disturb and falsify the entire vision, reducing it to ghosts of the 
"Self," but rather in the fact that the projection has given them an autono- 
mous life — I would almost say: a personality Being your creatures, they 
rebound on you, feed on your life, until they become obsessive forms. 

1 have already mentioned to you that at a later time you can breathe in 
and absorb the virtue developed in the "pupil," bringing back to unity the 
operation with two vessels. 



222 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH "TWO VESSELS"— REDUPLICATION 




For the corresponding preparation by magical action of the Caduceus, which 
I called the "second," one takes love as the ignifier of the fluidic force. 

The fire of Eros, which is habitually polarized in a downward direction, 
or toward sex and the animal nature, is isolated in the fluidic body and 
nourished sufficiently to produce the state of exaltation necessary to make 
that androgyne and igneous mercury by which the magical projection is 
set in action. 

This requires particular conditions in regard to the woman. Virginity is 
not among them, but in this practice, as opposed to the true and actual 
operations of sexual magic that you will be told about at the proper time, 
a certain purity is necessary. The woman also needs to have quite an in- 
tense preexisting sentiment. As for you, if you are far enough advanced on 
the path as you need to be for this, you will be able to create and actualize 
this in yourself on command. But you cannot demand this of the woman: 
she must quite naturally love you. The difficulty will be to find a young 
woman who consents on the basis of this sentiment to follow you onto the 
plane of magical love, and who also has the disposition for it. 

It is necessary at least at this stage, that the ems which is the instru- 
ment of the work should be not merely sexual desire and sexual craving, 
but actual love: something more subtle and vast that embraces the entire 
other person, as a desire for the whole of her. But its intensity should not 
be any the less for this. 1 can put it like this: you must desire the soul, the 
essence of the other; just as you may desire her body. Take note that if this 
condition is not rigorously realized, not only the operation will be ineffec- 
tive, but also you will be exposed to considerable psychic perils. 1 have 
told you that elsewhere we shall speak of procedures that also use sexual 
intercourse. But be assured that in order to operate in those, it is necessary 
first to have learned the method of love that exalts itself without contact, 
which is not tied to the idea of this contact and of sexual satisfaction. 

You should also know that any form of love is already magic in itself: the 
rapture of lovers is already an intoxication in the astral lights a fluidic 
intoxication. But they are not aware of this. You should be. Then you can 
proceed in a circular fashion: because eros facilitates fluidic contact for 



223 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH TWO VESSELS"— REDUPLICATION 

you, and the fluidic state in turn exalts eras. Thus you can produce in 
yourself a vortex of intensity that is inconceivable to the ordinary man and 
woman; and you can guess what the perils I have mentioned may be, and 
that I will address when treating the magic that uses carnal embrace. 

The outward technique is simple. Use as perfume musk, amber, or red 
rose in fairly intense saturation, adding if possible a shade of dove's blood. 
The most propitious hour is toward dawn. Sit opposite one another, im- 
mobile, yourself facing east. Having evoked the fluidic state (which pre- 
supposes this faculty in both; $ is presupposed, and it is a question of 
transforming it into $ by projecting into it the masculine 0), love one 
another, desire one another, thus, without motion or contact, in continuous 
mode, breathing in reciprocally and "vampirically," in an exaltation that 
increases without fear of possible zones of vertigo. You will have a sense of 
effective amalgamation, a feeling of the other in your whole body, not 
through contact but in a subtle embrace that is felt there in every point and 
penetrates you like an intoxication that possesses the blood of your blood. 
This will carry you, at the limit, to the threshold of a state of ecstasy, which 
is the point of magical equilibrium in which the ignified and supersatu- 
rated fluid can be attracted like lightning, and projected into the idea. 

In this operation you must again master the subtle play of dosage of the 
two opposing principles in the regime of the fire, while in the woman the 
element of love suffices, to which she gives her whole self In the magus, 
the progressive exaltation of the fire must be led by a cold principle that 
never grows less by itself, but on the contrary rises along with the growth 
of the fluidic vortex and becomes illuminated. If this principle is lacking, 
every magical possibility collapses, and, when nothing worse occurs, ev- 
erything can end up on a plane analogous to certain mystical states. In 
these, too, there is an erotic desire transferred unconsciously to the subtle 
plane by way of suitable images (the "Celestial Bridegroom," etc,), 101 and 
exasperated to the point of bursting out in a special and solitary form of 
psychic orgasm, described as joy and beatitude. 

Thus: an exaltation, a vortex that always has at its center the Self, 



101. Many so-called "divine apparitions" of the women mystics, compared to these, are 
of no more value than the visualizations "of similar kinds" that Abraxas was speaking of 
earlier. (Note by UR) 



224 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH "TWO VESSELS"— REDUPLICATION 

detached and apparently absent in the full abandonment to Eros and in 
the "amalgamation," but which, at the crucial point — at the perfect cook- 
ing point of the Mercury — suddenly intervenes, takes charge of the energy 
fixes it, and hurls it whither it will. 




The practice of the Mirror, as expounded in chapter III, includes two de- 
pendent realizations: the liberation of vision from the eye and its activa- 
tion in a "space" that is the astral light itself — which liberation is made 
possible by a certain detachment of the subtle body from the physical body. 

Now I will give you directions for the complete liberation of the former 
body, so as to be able to move it in space, and you along with it, leaving behind 
your physical body. In vulgar occultism diis is called "astral traveling/' 

In this realization, too, what operates is the will, as solar and central 
force 0. Keep firmly in mind that the true will comes from possession of 
one's self. It is strong in proportion to how absolute and energized is the 
possession of the self. Its force is that of the determination which com- 
mands it; and the force of such determination depends on the degree of 
centrality of the "Self." This solar, calm, decisive, and central will is our 
gold 0. In it you must give precise shape to your new goal. 

The realization has three phases: 1) detachment unaccompanied by 
consciousness during sleep; 2) the same, but with consciousness; 3) con- 
scious detachment in the waking state. 

The first aspect itself has progressive stages. Give yourself these tasks 
in turn: 

a) Move with the subtle body a light object near your bed; b) Move it in 
a distant place; c) Appear in sleep to another person; d) Make your pres- 
ence felt to a waking person; e) Appear in visible form to a waking per- 
son — and that is the final and perfect stage. 

Now 1 will show you the technique. As sleep approaches, when the 
spontaneous thoughts gradually attenuate and subside, you should fix your 
whole mind on the single thought of exteriorization. Represent to yourself 
minutely and distinctly in sequence all the acts required by your goal: the 
detachment of the double, the requisite movements, the route that it should 
take, its arrival at the detemined place, performing its action, its return, 



225 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH "TWO VESSELS 11 — REDUPLICATION 

the reabsorption of the double in the body, and the full memory in the 
morning. 

Think of all this with will: with energetic and at the same time calm, 
secure, and continuous will — without distractions, without violence or force, 
with a sense of security lucid and in full possession of yourself. The imagi- 
nation of the act, accomplished in all its details, should have been created 
before one feels the first signs of sleepiness. Then abandon yourself to 
sleep, as if it were a thing already done. Remembrance in the morning, as I 
have already told you, will be helped by spontaneous waking and a light 
perfume of musk, rose, or Florentine iris. 

In the case where you want to go to find someone, think first of that 
person, evoking her if possible with the help of her perfume, or by placing 
beneath your pillow some of her hair or an object that she has worn for 
some time close to her body. Keep in mind that unless you wield a very 
great force, the other person must have been warned, must possess a cer- 
tain subtle sensibility and, besides, must want this phenomenon herself. 
This will manifest more easily in the case of a bond of natural sympathy or 
an initiatic one. 

If you are already fairly advanced in magical practices, and also in those 
indicated by Leo for preserving a certain consciousness during sleep, and 
if then you can support your consciousness with the subtle body instead 
of exclusively with the physical body then you may try to partake directly 
of the subtle body's journey: you may slip out together with it at the mo- 
ment of falling asleep, and then lead it where you will, instead of just 
remembering the experience, if indeed you can, or just ascertaining the 
reality by means of the effects: the actual moving of objects, or the actual 
vision or sensation of yourself on the part of another person. 

The third stage of realization is the deliberate exit during the waking 
state. You should be in your magical cabinet, completely relaxed and with all 
the senses suspended; it is also preferable to close your ears with wax. Hav- 
ing reached the state of the most profound silence, let every thought be stilled 
and the sense of the body vanish; then concentrate all your spirit on the sole 
will — intense, infrangible, and as though materialized — of exiting. 101 When 



102. If you wish, you can attain the state of concentration not directly but with the help 
of the mirror, following all that I have told you in chapter III, and acting at the moment 
of the appearance of etheric light. 



226 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH "TWO VESSELS"— REDUPLICATION 

the instinctive jolts that I have mentioned try to hold you back from the 
incipient realization of your will, let them meet this present will like a bar 
of steel placed across your mind, against which they shatter, cut off the 
instant they are born. A neutral state will occur — then you will find your- 
self somewhere and will realize that you are no longer there with your physi- 
cal body. 

Now beware that you do not lose your sangfroid: know that you can go 
where you will, always realizing that you are an immaterial being moved 
directly by the mind. The power to act in this state on things and persons 
depends on the degree of ignification achieved by the fluidic body, and on 
the energy of the "Gold" principle. 

I said: "always realizing that you are not a material being." This has a 
double meaning: 1) Neutralizing a possibly undesirable visibility of your- 
self on the part of others; 2) Annulling any emotion arising from the habits 
of the physical body when the subtle body finds itself in certain circum- 
stances of the physical environment, which, however, can have no power 
over it. I will explain. 

Suppose that during your exit you encounter something that, if you 
were there in the physical body would cause a bruise or a wound. If you 
do not realize that in this state you cannot be bruised, but instead realize 
the situation in the terms of the physical body, an astral image will be 
formed in a state of panic and shock that will immediately hurl itself at 
your physical body and imprint on it the same transformation; you will 
find yourself stunned and bruised in your bed or laboratory. 

I am not telling you fables. Even parapsychology and ethnology have 
come to accept things of this sort, for example, in the cases of persons found 
dead or wounded in their beds after a night in which there was a hunt after 
"witches" or "werewolves." 101 The subtle body is made from the group of 
profound forces that preside over the elements and funcions of the animal 
body; and thus their modification is immediately transmitted to the latter. 
But I repeat that such a modification works solely through your mind, by 
suggestion. If you hold on firmly to the knowledge of your nonmateriality 
and your sangfroid, nothing in the physical world can do you any harm. 



103. A strange circumstance in these findings is that only the body receives the wounds, 
while the clothing remains intact. (Note by UR) 



227 
MAGICAL OPERATIONS WITH "TWO VESSELS '—REDUPLICATION 

If at any moment you wish to return, and do not immediately succeed, 
evoke the imagination of your physical body where you have left it, realize 
it intensely, and insert into this imagination your calm and firm will to 
return. 

To avoid another sort of danger, 1 advise you to trace around your body, 
before preparing to exit, a magic circle with the proper conjuration, but in 
such a way as not to paralyze the exit itself. Here is the reason, in brief: 
there are many dark beings in the invisible world that have no body, but which 
crave one, and which therefore throw themselves in the moment they see an 
"empty" one. And it is not said that you will notice, when you have re- 
turned to the normal state, that you are no longer just yourself. The dan- 
ger is less when the operation takes place in the sleeping state, because 
then there is someone else who is charged to keep watch on the envelope 
you have left behind. 

Naturally, you will take care that no one enters, that no knock or loud 
noise should occur in the place where your body rests. Otherwise the con- 
sequences could be very grave. 

A last advice: if you have moral scruples, know that all that you do in the 
subtle body to a person who does not wish it — even if only with the exterior 
consciousness informed by some prejudice or other — and who neverless 
remains defenseless before your occult action (the only defense is the self- 
canceling in that person of the memory of the event) , can cause grave distur- 
bances to that person, to the extent of hysteria and personality change. 

When you return from your exit to the waking state, be warned that the 
first Lime you may feel a state of deep prostration, a complete asthenia of 
the whole organism. You should react, shake yourself, making use even of 
a cold shower and violent gymnastic exercises. There follows a state of 
agitation, of feverish exuberance, and last a third phase of vague and gen- 
eral fatigue, loss of appetite, and difficulty in thinking. Anticipate all this 
in such a way that when it actually happens you are not impressed by it 
and do not let it take you over, rather waiting calmly for everything to 
return to its normal state. These repercussions may last several hours, or at 
most a few days. 



Tibetan Inifiafic Teachings 

The "Void" and the "Diamond-Thunderboir 



the 



he esoteric Tibetan teachings found here are taken from the Bde-Michog-Tantra 
(in Sanskrit: Shrlcakrasambhara), which was attributed to Yeshes-Senge, a monk 
of the gNas-rNying sect, published for the first time in 1919 with an introduc- 
tion, a synopsis, and a partial English trans lation by the lama Kazi Dawa Samdup, 
in volume VII of the series of Tantrik Texts edited by Arthur Avalon. The ex- 
cerpts published here correspond to pages 54-56 and 77-82 of this edition. 104 

These are two contemplative processes, the first aimed at detaching the 
mind, the second to free the senses, in order to attain samadhi in relation to 
various objects in a series that leads to the supreme state of shunyata. 

In both sets of instructions the reader will notice how the various images 
are connected to particular points in the human body on which the mental 
focus is directed. In the first set we begin with images of deities that are pro- 
gressively interiorized and simplified, until the mind identifies with them and 
realizes their essence as rDorje. The term "rDorje" (in Sanskrit: vajra.) has 
the double meaning of "diamond" and "thunderbolt" It designates that which 
is hard, permanent, and indestructible like a diamond, and that which is sud- 
den and irresistible like a thunderbolt. This is the basic principle of the magi- 
cal resunection. The supreme, triple secret of Tibetan Tantrism is said to be the 
" diamond-thunderbolt" of the mind, word, and body. 

There is an interesting relationship between vajra and shftnyata in these 
doctrines. ShunyatS is a term ofMahayana Buddhism. While in original Bud- 
dhism the concept of nirvana, which does not at all mean annihilation (see 
chapter VI)> is opposed to samsara, Mahayana Buddhism conceives samsara 
and nirvana as two coexistent aspects of a higher reality, or better, a higher 
state of consciousness, called shunyata. Shunyata literally means "emptiness/' 
"void." It is the state of an absolute metaphysical freedom, a depth that can 
contain and will anything, without being altered or moved. Understood as ba~ 



104. These excerpts appear here in the original Samdup translation, with slight modifica- 
tions made to reflect how the UR Group presented the text to their Italian readers. 
(Editor's note) 



229 
TIBETAN 1NIT1ATIC TEACHINGS 

sis and substance of all things (in Tibetan it is called Kungzhi), its identifica- 
tion to vajra shows it as the same radiant, incorruptible essence, consisting of 
pure activity, which the Hellenic traditions claimed the intelligible world or 
the world of "beings" was made of 

In regard to the second group of contemplations, we need to add the follow- 
ing. The world that we know is only our world, a world of images that the 
mind projects outward. We mistake these images for reality and do not realize 
that we are constantly walking in circles around ourselves. In order to attain 
"knowledge" and the vision oj the world of the real, we need to withdraw our 
consciousness from the images and to suspend the impulse whereby we project 
outward that which acts within our inner world, affected by desire. It is pos- 
sible to -withdraw and to concentrate the mind on a minute, fixed point and to 
receive in it the sensible impressions, until an ensuing transformation allows 
us to recognize things as they are in themselves, and no longer as shadows of 
phenomena. This is the meaning o/samadhi. This should suffice as a general 
orientation for the second group of practices. They lead to a samadhi, first in 
regard to the various senses, and then, through this samadhi, to a higher type 
0/ samadhi, which is the realization o/shunyata. 

Imagine 105 in one's navel Loe a white eight-petaled lotus. 

In the center of this white lotus is a lunar disk. Upon this disk there are 
the personifications of the Diamond-Thunderbolt (rDorje-Sems-Pah — in 
Sanskrit: Vajra-sattva) and of His Spouse (YDorje-sNy ems-ma) in close 
embrace, the Mantra "HUM" being in their hearts. 107 



105. The reader should be aware that instructions of this type presuppose a "creative 
state" (bsKyedrim) of the mind, which is necessary in order to make the various images 
"work" properly. It is the magical state of a more or less complete "fluidic exaltation," A. 
David-Neel (Mystiques et magiciens du Thibet, Paris, 1929 } p. 133) notes that "in Tibetan, 
: to imagine"' (migpa) refers to a concentration of ones thought that is pushed until the 
objectification of the subjective, imagined image is achieved. It is a state of trance during 
which imagined facts and places completely replace those that are perceived in the state 
of normal consciousness. 1 ' 

106. The navel is connected to the solar plexus, which is the main center of the fluidic 
forces in the human body. 

107. The God and His Bride correspond to the double aspect of every metaphysical 
principle: the former, fixed and central (corresponding to nirvana and to the adamantine 
aspect of vajra); the latter, dynamic, creative, and radiant (corresponding to samsdra and 



230 
TIBETAN INITIATIC TEACHINGS 

Then imagine that rays of light issue from the "HUM" in all directions, 
vividly defining in the mind both the chief Devata (God) and the sur- 
rounding space as the vessel, and the other Devatas and Beings occupying 
it as the vessel's content. Fix the attention on this mental picture. Then 
imagine that the rays of light emitted from the 4t HUM" excite all these into 
activity The process is like that of a magnet exciting movement of par- 
ticles of iron dust (filings). 

Then, as the rays are gradually drawn back, imagine that all the exter- 
nal space and its contents are drawn inward and absorbed into the form of 
the principal external Deity (Heruka and His consort). This process is lik- 
ened to the absorption of mercury by cow dung. 

Next of the two principal Devatas the female is absorbed in the male, 
and the two into one face and two hands. This process is likened to that of 
a tortoise contracting its limbs. 

Then the consort of the external (god) Heruka 108 is absorbed in the 
male and this into the Diamond- Thunderbolt in the navel. The consort of 
this Deity, too, sinks into the male. Then gradually the male figure itself 
sinks into the "HUM" in the heart and the "HUM" gradually resolves itself 
into the Bindu 109 (dot). This process is likened to that of meteoric lights 
dissolving into each other. Then finally even the Bindu itself gradually 
becomes fainter and fainter until it fades away and disappears altogether, a 
process that is likened to salt dissolving in water. 



to the thunderbolt aspect oivajra). Their embrace represents their connection. The mantra 
HUM in Tibetan secret doctrine serves as a synthesis of the various metaphysical potencies 
corresponding to the various parts of its symbol Meditation is focused on these parts. 

108, In the technique, the expression "external God" — and also "external cult" — must be 
referred to images of the Gods and the essences that are thought to be objective beings. 
But in these schools it is explicitly taught that such Gods are merely creatures of the 
mind, employed to introduce a person to certain metaphysical experiences. During 
practice , the "external forms" follow the "internal forms. 1 ' The image is reabsorbed and 
the mind directly assimilates the corresponding meaning contained in it, until everything 
is reduced to shunyatd (cf. the commentary to the text, pp. 34-37). This is the integral, 
or final, state of contemplation (hsKyed-rim) mentioned further on. 

109. Thus we have a series that in meditation is realized backwards, from the outside to 
the inside; from the manifested and from the image to the un-manifested and to the 
essence. Dot (sometimes represented on the forehead), HUM in the heart, HUM in the 
navel, androgynous Image of the deity, Divine Couple. 



231 
TIBETAN INITIATIC TEACHINGS 

Such are the five principle processes of meditation illustrated by what 
are called the five radical similes. 

In the uncurtailed or unabridged process (rDzogs-rim) the mental pic- 
tures (sNang-va) are like dresses, light rays, waves of water; but in them- 
selves and according to their own true nature they are like dancers, the 
sun, and the ocean. 110 The final process of absorption and absence of all 
thoughts is likened to that of a bubble sinking back into water, or a rain- 
bow melting away into the skies. 

So the process is illustrated in various manners by various similes. 

Finally, the keeping of the mind in a state of tranquillity devoid of ob- 
jects is called the process of concentration on the Diamond-Thunderbolt 
(jDorje-Sems-dPah = shunyata). 




Assuming that he has attained to the stage of firm concentration of the 
mind and that he wishes to proceed further in the perfect or final stage 
(meditation on the formless), he should proceed thus; — Either in the morn- 
ing (or any other time) let him take an easy position, cross-legged, and go 
through as a preliminary step the previously described meditation on Forms 
(b$Kyed-rim$). Let him imagine that the HUM inside his heart sheds out 
rays of light on all outer space and the objects therein. They are all gath- 
ered within the body. The Female Devata, too, is drawn in through the 
nostrils into one's own heart. Having thought of oneself as the two-handed 
(Heruka)j imagine the Guru on one's head, 111 Put forth intense faith in 
him, and pray: "I beseech thee, cause pure samadhi to grow in my mind," 
Then imagine on the (Tibetan) letter "A" a lunar disk, red and white, 
about the size of half of a pea inside one's heart. Upon the lunar disk 



110, In other words, one realises that what has form and the character of apparition is 
related to its essence like a dancer is related to his clothes moving with him, or like the 
sun to the rays of its own light, or like the ocean to the waves of its own surface. 

11 1. The Teacher (guru) can be an objective figuration that fixes the ideal that the 
practitioner strives to realize; a symbolic form that at first is animated in a relationship of 
devotion and dedication, and eventually is reabsorbed into the effective realization. This 
is the case of a real carrier of "spiritual influences," with which one happened to have 
come in contact with. In this case, the visualization indicated by the text aims at 
actualizing such influences for the positive outcome, of the ritual. 



232 
TIBETAN INITIATIC TEACHINGS 

imagine a light-point (a zero or Bindu) about the size of a mustard seed 
that is the concentrated form of one's mind. Fix the mind on that and 
regulate the breath gently (literally, "make it a gentle pair"). When one is 
well practiced, the mind is held and does not run astray, but remains fixed. 
Then one attains the blissful and clear samadhi. 

When one attains stability or firmness in that (samadhi), then transfer 
the imagination to another of the sense organs, 112 Go through the prelimi- 
nary step described above. For the actual method: imagine within the two 
pupils that there are two very fine bright white points, one in each eye. 

Close the eyes and imagine in your mind that the points are there. 
When the mind gets accustomed to that, then look on various objects... 
On being well practiced the point is constantly and vividly present to the 
mind's eye. No matter on whatever object the eye may fall, samadhi is pro- 
duced. Having achieved stability in that, draw in the point within the heart, 
and imagine that the latter gains great brilliancy and clearness, and keep 
the mind tranquil (literally, at a level: mNyamzbhag)\ this will produce 
samadhi of the most excellent kind, or the state of Tranquillity 113 

After this, transfer the imagination to the ears. The preliminary steps 
are as described before. For the actual meditation; — Imagine two blue 
Points or Dots upon two lunar disks the size of half a pea inside each ear 
and meditate upon them, in a place free from noise. When you have suc- 
ceeded in fixing the mind upon them, listen to sounds, at the same time 
keeping the mind fixed upon the two Points and not letting it stray from 
them. On being practiced in that, one attains vividness of the mind-picture 
and samadhi follows on hearing sound. When one has gained stability in 
this, withdraw the Points inside the heart and imagine that the Points have 



112. It is well known that the Hindu teachings regard the mind as a sixth sense and the 
sense organs as mere instruments from which the corresponding faculties can even be 
detached and used directly, as it happens in samadhi. 

113. In other words, one attains the vision in supersensible form of those things that are 
only partially perceptible via sensible sight: occult powers of forms and colors. After this 
contact, the concentrated mind shifts to the heart, in which it produces a samadhi of a 
higher degree. We may note that these instructions are those mentioned in a confused 
way by Rudolf Steiner — in regard to particular points on which one needs to concentrate 
the mind that has been freed from the senses in order to know the forces that have 
formed and preside over the various organs of the senses. 



233 
TIBETAN INITIAT1C TEACHINGS 

gained blazing brilliancy and vividness. From this excellent samadhi or 
Tranquility (state of mental level) is produced. 

Then transfer the imagination to the Nose. The preliminaries are the 
same as above: — Imagine a yellow Point on a lunar disk in the cavity of 
each nostril in a place free from any odor, and concentrate your mind on 
that. When the mind is fixed, smell various odors, keeping the mind fixed 
on the yellow Points, without letting the mind stray away When one gets 
used to that, on the perception of odors there is produced samadhi. When 
firmness is gained in this (state), draw the Points into the heart. By this, 
brilliancy and vividness of the Point is prodticed and practice in this pro- 
duces samadhi. 

Next transfer the imagination to the Tongue, Preliminaries the same as 
above: — Imagine a red Point on a lunar disk at the root of the tongue and 
meditate on it, without tasting any flavor. Concentrate youT mind on it, do 
not let it stray Then, when the mind is fixed on the Point, taste various 
flavors, keeping the mind concentrated on the Point. Then draw it inside 
the heart. When the Point attains brilliancy and vividness, samadhi is pro- 
duced through the sense of taste. 

Then transfer one's imagination to the (entire) body Preliminaries the 
same as above. Either at the root of the secret parts (that is, the junction of 
the penis and the scrotum), or on your forehead, imagine a green Point on 
a lunar disk, and fix your mind on it without touching anything. When 
your mind has attained some degree of fixity on that spot, try concentra- 
tion, touching various things and keeping the mind from straying. When 
vividness of the Point is obtained, practice until it is quite firm, then draw 
the Point in the place of touch into the Point within the heart, and medi- 
tate upon that, until great brilliance and vividness is obtained, which will 
produce Tranquillity or excellent samadhi. 11 * 

Then after that, transfer the imagination to the mind, which moves 
everywhere. Preliminaries same as above. Actual process: — Imagine a very 
small pink Point on the top of that already imagined to be within the heart. 



114. Overall, these are procedures that have two degrees. In the first degree one obtains a 
subtle perception that is transformed (see what Leo has explained in chapter 111); this 
sensation, is then led to the heart, in which it acquires light, opening itself up and leading 
to what is formless. 



234 
TIBETAN INITIATtC TEACHINGS 

Try the meditation in a very quiet place at first. When you have succeeded 
in concentrating your mind, try the meditation in company where you are 
sure that some evil passions will be excited such as lust or the like. Then 
imagine that the chief passion — Moha 113 (infatuation) — which accompa- 
nies all other evil passions is concentrated in it. Think that it is absorbed 
into a blue Point. Fix the mind on that. On getting accustomed in that 
(practice), passions will not arise; or should they do so, they are controlled 
by the mind. When one has attained firmness in that, sink the blue Point 
into the pink Point, and that into the white and red Point below it. The last 
sinks into the moon-disk, which in its turn is dissolved or disappears in 
the sky like a cloud (that has disappeared) . Then there remains only Emp- 
tiness (shtiny atd or sTongpa), in which the mind is to be kept at a level 
This will produce the profound tranquil state samadhi called Zhi-gNas (lit- 
erally "Resting-in-peace"). Then rising from the state of Tranquillity 
(samadhi), imagine again the lunar disks and the Points to be present or 
springing forth simultaneously: and that one's ownself , too, is at once trans- 
formed into the Henika (God). Regard external objects as being only vis- 
ible and apparently true, but having no independent and absolute reality 
in themselves. 116 Meditating thus till each stage has shown its sign of per- 
fection or proficiency one at last attains proficiency or perfection in the 
whole, as a result of which one obtains profound Tranquillity, which is the 
realization of Shtiny atd, which is bliss and clarity. Continuation in these 
practices produces the knowledge of the path (mThong-Lam) , from is pro- 
duced Buddha-hood. This is the stage of conferring grace and blessing 
(bdag-byndrlabs-pahi) on oneself, accompanied by Bija (Sabon)} 17 



115. Moha t which Dawa Samdup renders as infatuation. It is related to the concepts of 
early Buddhism, such as "mania," "attachment," and "craving," 

116. This knowledge is opposed to the HJig-rTen-pahi-yeshes, a Tibetan expression designating 
"worldly knowledge" that regards things as real in themselves, rather than appearances the 
effective- substance of which is emptiness, shunyata. The latter is called Mi-nog-pahi-yeshes, 
an expression that contains the idea of a knowledge that occurs in the absence of representa- 
tions or thoughts, according to what has been said in regard to samadhi 

117. "Seeds* (in Sanskrit: htjd) are things and beings realized by consciousness during 
samadhi, in the state of ?c6pi crrcepnaiiKoi, as individuating and radiant principles in 
which they have their essential generation. In alchemical terms they would be "solar 
Sulfurs" of the "metals." 



Arvo 

On the Counter-Initiation 



T h 



hose who attempt to overcome human limitations and yearn to attain 
knowledge and power need to be aware of the existence of what, using 
Rene Guenon's term, one may call the counter-initiation. They also need to 
have an idea of the various forms assumed by it, as well as of the different 
means it employs to achieve its goals. 

As a starting point, we may take the general idea that forces exist which 
attempt to insert themselves into the human domain, both at an individual 
and at a collective level, not only in order to mislead every aspiration to 
true spirituality, but also in order to create new currents, suggestions, and 
ideological systems. These are such as to blur the vision of truth, to falsify 
values, to favor the emergence of inferior influences, namely of every form 
of materialism, disorder, and subversion in civilizations. 

The opposition between the forces of "good 1 ' and "evil" is a common- 
place in religions; however, this does not adequately deal with the issues at 
stake. It is not simply a question of the moral and religious order, but of an 
action much larger, objective, and concrete, which the representatives of 
religion themselves often fail to recognize, at times even falling uncon- 
sciously as victims to it. 

I will limit myself here to a few considerations that are specifically re- 
lated to the disciplines dealt with in this book. However, some general 
remarks may first be in order. Generally speaking, there is no subversive 
movement in history 7 and in human thought that does not have its "oc- 
cult' 1 origins. What needs to be understood is that one of the most recent 
"confections" devised by the dark forces is the "positivist" theory, which 
adamantly denies the existence of such backgrounds and claims that ev- 
erything in human affairs can be explained through tangible historical 
causes. Isn't this "positivist" mentality the one that best lends itself to the 
hidden schemes of the forces active behind the scenes? Some Catholic 



236 
ON THE COUNTER-INITIATION 

thinker has poignantly suggested that the most recent trick of the devil is 
to persuade people that he does not exist 118 

In principle, every revolution, subversion, antitradition, and demagogy 
is branded with the visible seal of a nonhuman force responsible for urging 
the masses on and getting them drunk on this or that ideology De Maistre 
has written many pages of perennial value on this topic. The purely politi- 
cal and social consideration of the revolutionary phenomenon mistakes 
exteriority with essence. The essence of every revolution is something that 
is not so much directed against people and institutions, but rather against 
the spirit; in some extreme cases — an elucidation of specific examples would 
be superfluous — a revolution may even appear as a Satanic act. 

That aside, Ren£ GuSnon has been an expert in identifying the influ- 
ences that have worked behind the scenes and produced what is generally 
called the ''modern mentality," beginning with domains such as science 
that are supposed to be immune to such actions. Every form of material- 
ism and scientism amounts in effect to suggestions and limitations of ho- 
rizons that are too organized and tendentious for us to assume that their 
origin and diffusion are spontaneous and simply caused by human stupid- 
ity: especially when we notice the precise convergence of the practical ef- 
fects of all that with the main goals, elsewhere more visible, of the counter- 
initiation, Guenon was correct when he wrote: 

What is truly strange, and would even be comical, if this were not a seri- 
ous, not to say sinister issue, is that materialism itself, which claims to be 
able to shed light on every mystery, emerges from some very mysterious 
and shady background; the same is true, from another point of view, of 
the very notion of "matter" that is at its basis, but which is certainly one 
of the most enigtnatic and unintelligible domains imaginable. 

The fact that human beings — continues Guenon — have come to con- 
ceive as ordinary and normal a life that is reduced to its lowest possibili- 
ties; and that they identify as reality, and even as most eminent reality 



118, Cf. "Les fails myst£rieux de Beaming, 11 in Etudes carmditaines, 1933, p. 11: "The 
demon has a thousand tricks up his sleeve, and his great art in this world, where almost 
no one believes anymore, is to have his existence denied, because It would be a proof of 
the existence of the supernatural" (Note by UR) 



237 
ON THE COUNTER-INITIATION 

whatever is tangible, visible, touchable, and measurable — this is indeed 
the effect of an infatuation, of a sort of magic circle that has led to the 
atrophy and exclusion of the possibilities of every higher vision and sensi- 
bility. And the counterpart of this magic circle is a conception of history 
that assumes that the way in which man today regards things is sane and 
"normal," corresponding to a civilization that more, than any other claims 
to be "enlightened" and free from superstitions. 

However, we must keep in mind that the counter-initiation applies it- 
self to a different direction and acts in a different way when the magic 
circle just mentioned becomes weaker, and when people begin to suspect 
anew that there is indeed an invisible domain beyond the visible one, that 
there is a deeper and more mysterious consciousness than ordinary every- 
day consciousness, and all this not as theory but as reality. "Openings" of 
this kind are taking place in wide sectors of the population in our contem- 
porary civilization, due to various circumstances. Corresponding to this 
but more visible is the action of influences aimed at preventing such changes 
from producing positive results, but instead leading people into even graver 
dangers and degradations than could or can ever be produced by material- 
ism and scientism. 

What is employed here is a diversionary tactic, which is efficacious 
wherever one is ignorant that beyond the normal world there are the worlds 
of the supernormal and of the subnormal; that the removal of the limits of 
ordinary consciousness may occur in the direction of the superpersonality 
and superconsciousness, but also as in the direction of the subpersonality 
and of a reduced consciousness; and finally, that beyond sensible and "natu- 
ral" reality there is not only the sphere of the supernatural, but also that of 
the subnatural and of an inferior psychism. All this is completely ignored, 
it seems, by the various currents of contemporary occultism and "spiritu- 
alism," not to mention "me tapsy chics," psychoanalysts, and the like. The 
people who belong to these groups, due to their narrow-minded views and 
methods, do not even suspect the existence of this principle. Now, both 
Guenon and Evola have revealed the existence of such counterfeits, confu- 
sions, ideological and practical deviations in contemporary "spiritualism" 
and occultism. Thus the legitimate suspicion arises that what is at work 
here is a secret, nonhuman, intelligent action, the specific purpose of which 



238 
ON THE COUNTER-INITIATION 

is to lead every spirit that attempts to leave the magic circle of practical 
materialism in a downward rather than upward direction; not toward the 
higher personality but toward the subpersonality; not toward true spiritu- 
ality, and metaphysical and initiatic knowledge, but toward the world of 
an inferior psychism, consisting of phenomena, nebulous visions, and sen- 
sations, which end by inhibiting every possibility of authentic develop- 
ment, if not actually causing the alteration and disintegration of the spiri- 
tual unity. This is precisely the purpose of the counter-initiation. As we 
can see, we thereby return to the order of ideas that is of paramount inter- 
est to our readers. When considering the growth of sects, lodges, and move- 
ments of every shade, our readers must realize that the confusion we have 
described is very widespread and more dangerous than ever, especially 
considering that there is a virtually total lack of people invested with both 
the competence and the authority to denounce it as it deserves. 

The spiritual deviation is promoted by the attraction exercised on the 
majority of people, first by everything of a sensational and "mysterious" 
character (such that today a certain "occultism" is often on the level of 
"thriller" movies and mystery novels), and second by everything that is 
"phenomenal," Concerning the latter, the illusion extends also to people 
of a certain intellectual level, to people who are not mere spiritualists or 
me tapsy chics, but who nevertheless would like to enter the initiatic world. 
These people believe all too easily that phenomena are always sensible 
signs of a spiritual realization. The truth is otherwise, since in a certain 
ambience the same phenomenon can be produced on the basis of both a 
regression and an integration of the personality For instance, levitation 
can be produced equally by a magus, by a saint, by a medium, or by an 
initiate; and obviously in each of these cases the phenomenon acquires a 
very different meaning. 

Aside from the world of mediums, on which we shall not dwell because 
its regressive character is all too obvious, and aside from cases that I would 
call "direct intervention" (I am referring to the apparition of certain fig- 
ures who try to impart this or that "revelation" and to form groups and 
movements — we know how often that is spoken of, and not always merely 
as a mystification), there are other cases in which the deviant and suspect 
character of various occultist currents may be traced, in last analysis, to 



239 
ON THE COUNTER-INITIATION 

some mysterious contacts. These contacts, propitiated by certain methods 
of psychic development, are with forces of which we do not suspect the 
existence, much less their nature, but which are always on a state of alert 
in the event that someone lacking the necessary "dignity* and superiority 
dares to venture into their domain. It is on this basis that a rather worri- 
some light could be cast on the background of the foundation of several 
Masonic lodges or Theosophical-occultist groups. 119 

A threat of a more general character, due to the fact that it is connected 
to modern currents that are less specialized and often portrayed as "cur- 
rents of thought," consists of a version of pantheism more or less associ- 
ated with the cult of Life and of the Irrational. It is necessary to take a 
stand against this view as well, because there are too many people who are 
inclined to see in pantheism (as opposed to religious and dogmatic the- 
ism) a higher form of initiatic knowledge. After all, was there not an at- 
tempt to brand Hindu spirituality as a whole as "pantheistic," ignoring 
everything in it that is the utmost negation of pantheism? (It is enough to 
recall early Buddhism,) But in this context I will not dwell on this ideo- 
logical aberration, but rather on the practical consequences stemming from 
it. As Guenon said, pantheism is present in all those trends that "induce 
being to "fuse itself — and 'confuse itself,' we might add — in a sort of cos- 
mic consciousness that excludes all effective transcendence and spiritual- 
ity." The various Theosophical theories about "overcoming the illusion of 
separativeness," the "One Life," and so forth, together with the correspond- 
ing corollaries of humanitarianism and egalitarianism, almost always point 



1 19. It may be interesting to report some impressions from a visitor to a certain location 
in India and the contact he had with a person there; "Who knows what type of forces are 
at work here? Rishikesh is a hotbed of psychic energies and this man seemed to me a 
person possessed, although not by God, He gave me the impression that he had sold his 
soul, and that he had profited from the 'sale, 1 which is a rare and frightening thing. 
Whence come ideas? Great inventors and managers of the world are men who build 
through other peoples brains; they have the power of coordinating, of genius, of 
initiative, as well as a sense of what is required in the material world. Behind them there 
is always a background of other people more or less known. R. A. K. seemed to me 
terribly alive, and yet as if he was a vessel of evil, like a vial whose contents could bring 
about terrible devastations once opened and poured out on the world." (E Yeats-Brown, 
Lancer at Large, Leipzig, 1937, p. 252) 



240 
ON THE COUNTER-INITIATION 

in this direction, which represents a real "inverted development" or "invo- 
lution." As Guenon said; traditional teachings know 

the initiatic symbolism of a "navigation" across the Ocean, representing 
the psychic domain, which must be crossed while avoiding all its dan- 
gers in order to reach the goal; but what is to be said of someone who 
flings himself into the Ocean and has no aspiration but to drown himself 
in it? This is very precisely the significance of a so-called 'fusion" with 
a £< cosmic consciousness" which is really nothing but the confused and 
indistinct assemblage of all the psychic influences; and, whatever some 
people may imagine, these influences have absolutely nothing in com- 
mon with spiritual influences, even if they may happen to imitate than 
to a certain extent in some of their outward manifestations. Those who 
make this fatal mistake either forget about or are unaware of the dis- 
tinction between the "Upper Waters" and the "Lower Waters"; instead 
of raising themselves toward the Ocean above, they plunge into the abyss 
of the Ocean below; instead of concentrating all their powers so as to 
direct them toward the formless world, which alone can be called "spiri- 
tual/ 7 they disperse them in the endlessly changeable and fugitive diver- 
sity of the forms of subtle manifestation, with no suspicion that they are 
mistaking for a fullness of "life" something that is in truth the realm of 
death and of a dissolution without hope of return/ 20 

I suggested at the start that the forces of the counter-initiation "infil- 
trate" the human forces. What I mean is that there must be certain spiri- 
tual or intellectual deviations, which those forces tend to increase by add- 
ing to them what in magic is called a "direction of efficacy" This is evident 
in the case I have just mentioned, since pantheism, vitalism, the theory of 
the unconscious, and so on are often the mere products of contemporary 
thought The proponents of these views are people who do not fully real- 
ize the consequences of their ideas, nor the degree to which these views 
can be utilized by beings who, unlike them, know exactly what they are 
doing and, so to speak, think for them. 

This leads us to a very complex issue, namely that of the nature and 



120. Quote from the English translation by Lord Northbourne. Cf. R, Guenon, The Reign 
of Quantity and the Signs of the Times, London, 1953, pp. 289-300. (Editor's note) 



241 
ON THE COUNTER-INITIATION 

origin of the counter-initiation. Up to a point, we can rightly refer to them 
as "forces," whose malefic action should not be attributed to their inten- 
tion, but rather to their nature, just as the corrosive influence of an acid 
does not come from its intention, but rather from its very nature. That 
which is variously called the "intermediate world," the "infernal region," 
or the "demonic world" (though not using "demon" in the moral and reli- 
gious sense of Christianity) may be the origin of such an action, whenever 
the world of human beings and human thoughts carelessly opens itself up 
to it. But beyond mere forces, we must also allow for real, intelligent, and 
personal beings as the representatives or agents of the counter-initiation. 
These beings, like initiates, are connected to a "chain." Gu6non talks about 
a "deviated and perverted initiation," something that has derived from an 
effective initiation "through a degeneration that has been carried out all 
the way to the inversion which may be called "Satanism" However, Guenon 
admits that what intervenes at this point is a metaphysical event, since the 
shift from mere degeneration and involution to the inversion and the inten- 
tion that characterize the counter-initiation (aside from the destructive 
"natural" influences previously described) is not a casual one. In fact, 
Guenon talks about "a revolt against legitimate authority and the claim for 
an impossible independence" originating in some initiatic organizations, 
on the part of people who had previously received its force and who there- 
fore, in virtue of it, find themselves beyond the merely human plane. 121 It 
may be helpful to trace this back further, to those who, instead of becom- 
ing gods, preferred to be the gods' enemies. 

This leads me to a last consideration. Evola has brought to light the fact 
that a natural process leads Western man in the precise direction of the 
counter-initiation. According to Evola, beginning with the Renaissance, 
Western man wanted to be "free" and autonomous, cutting off in rapid 



121. On another occasion Guenon recognizes these two distinct aspects when he talks 
about actions similar to those performed by necromancers, who act by supplying their 
will with the psychic disanimate residues of the dead. In this case the psychic residues 
would correspond to initiatic organizations that are undergoing an advanced phase of 
degeneration and have, as it were, outlived themselves; the part of the necromancer is 
played by the forces of the counter-initiation that impart to these degenerate organisms 
an inverted direction. We will return to this topic when dealing with the genesis of 
modern Freemasonry. 



242 
ON THE COUNTER-INITIATION 

succession all the remaining contacts with the higher world and pursuing 
the path of immanence and the conquest of the physical world. But when 
the end result is not materialism and a material reality dominated by tech- 
nology, the individual separated from the spiritual world tends to a sort of 
asceticism that consists in the overamplification of the dominating will 
and its freedom, thus forging the myth of the Supennan. Thus, the indi- 
vidual can only align himself with the line of influence of the counter- 
initiation, and appearances in this direction (i.e., of unknowing "ascetics 
of evil") already exist and are very significant. Probably these are the ways 
with which the destiny of an entire civilization will be sealed. 

Coming back to our context, the capital importance of the concept of 
the counter-initiation will we hope become evident to our readers through 
these brief considerations. These are not whims, but very serious and real 
things that must be taken into account for one's own intellectual and spiri- 
tual defense when one is committed to our sciences. 

[For the subject of this essay see R. Guenon, The Reign of Quantity and 
the Signs of the Times, trans. Lord Northbourne (London, 1953); Apercus 
sur Vinitiation, (Paris, 1945); J. Evola, Maschera e volto dello spiritudlismo 
contemporaneo (2nd ed M Bari> 1949). 



Luce 

Opus Magicum: 

Perfumes 



I 



n the rituals of Magic it is recommended to employ particular fragrances, 
so that the psychic faculties of the magus may be more easily and quickly 
elevated and raised to the proper level This is the general principle; but it 
may be useful to supply specific instances. 

First of all, one should notice the very ancient use of perfumes, which 
were at first confined to religious ceremonies — e.g., in ancient Egypt, in 
which their knowledge, as substances and manipulations, was strictly re- 
served to the priestly caste. 

After a few millennia, there is today almost no trace of those particular 
notions that at one time formed part of the Sacred Science, with the excep- 
tion of some brief and confused mentions in medieval compilations, and a 
vague and superficial modern study on the relationship between sex and 
perfume, I am also obviously excluding the many detailed treatises on the 
production of perfumes, or on the cultivation of the plants from which 
they are derived. In such treatises we can find a complete treatment of the 
subject matter from an industrial and chemical point of view, but abso- 
lutely no observations on the physiological and psychological reactions 
produced by these perfumes; in other words, these treatises lack what is 
really essential and interesting, namely the knowledge of the empirical 
reasons for using these perfumes. Physiologists and psychologists have 
hardly dealt with this aspect in their books, or have allotted only a few 
pages to it (among those consulted are Luciani, Ellis, Pouiliet, Berguet, 
Krafft, Martin eau, Moreau, Penta, Capano, Nuccio, Moll, Tardiff, Charcot, 
Monin, and Roux) . When circumstances allow, I intend to publish an ex- 
haustive study on the subject, from which 1 have borrowed the pages of 
this essay; brief, but sufficient for practical use by the intelligent operator. 

It is well known, and scientifically established, that every animal or 



244 
OPUS MAGICUM: PERFUMES 

plant emanates a certain odor, though it is not normally perceived by hu- 
man beings. 

Odors, as many experiments have shown, can be perceived only in the 
gaseous state, determining particular excitations of the olfactory sense, 
which is closely associated through a particular psychic reaction to the 
sphere of feelings. These feelings generate reactions both in the motor 
organs and in the glands of the vegetative and reproductive sphere. (Cf. 
principally Luciani, Fisiologia delVuomo, vol. iy ch. 4; A. Dumesil, Des 
odeurs, de leur nature et de leur action physiologique.) 

It is also known that olfactory perception, which is localized in the nos- 
trils, takes place through both phases of respiration. This is very important 
in our study, especially as we recall the instructions by Abraxas and myself. 

I will not dwell on the purely physiological observations about the re- 
actions of the odors in the organs of breathing; I will only remind the 
reader that breathing is the act that puts the individual in a mediated rela- 
tionship with the cosmic vital energy. 122 The latter, penetrating the blood 
through the lungs, is absorbed by the astral body 

The reader should not confuse the latter term with the descriptions of 
it found in Theosophical literature and the like. 

I rather mean, with Paracelsus, the aereal body 7 which is the substance 
of life and of actions; this body can be known by the Initiate only through 
practice, and not through literature or discussions. 

In the operations of Theurgy and Magic, the astral /acuities are excited 
with every possible means; directly through the will, and indirectly, through 
perfumes and ceremonial forms. 

Those who have practiced breathing techniques know the particular subde 
reaction that they produce. Through the use of perfumes, this reaction is 
determined by an order of vibrations that suit the purpose of the operator. 

Perfumes are employed by following the law of astral correspondences 
(signaturae rerum) during each planet's days and hours (for these, see Pe- 
ter of Abano's Heptameron) . Let us remember that, in general, they partici- 
pate with the nature of the element water (see Agrippa, De Occulta 



122. The term "mediated" refers to the act of breathing. As it is usually performed, it has 
an element of impurity, in that the individual essence is not in direct contact with the 
cosmic life, as happens in further stages (to be described later) when astral breathing is 
practiced. 



245 
OPUS MAGICUM: PERFUMES 

Phihsophia, I, 7) and thus they are useful solvents of the element earth and 
coagulators of the element air — since water is the mean between them. 

Natural perfumes, which are the only ones employed in our operations, 
are divided into two categories: animal and vegetal. The former are sup- 
plied by blood, sperm, milk, hair, bones, and by other animal sources. The 
latter are supplied by woods, leaves, fruits, roots, flowers, resins, and by 
everything else that has a vegetal origin. 

I will supply a list, noting their planetary correspondence. In the cases 
of animals we mean their parts, referring also to their special signatures. 

Sun© 

Laurel, Aloe, Amber, Balsam, Benzoin, Calamus, Cinnamon, Cedar, Ce- 
landine, Ivy, Heliotrope, Ash, Carnation, Gentian, Hyacinth, juniper, Sun- 
flower, Incense, Iris, Lavender, Lotus, Marjoram, Mastic, Mint, Myrrh, 
Musk, Peony, Pepper, Vervain, Vine, Saffron — Eagle, Cantharides, Heart, 
Brain, Marrow, Blood, Scarab. 

Moon B 

Camphor, Incense, Hyssop, Magnetite, Myrtle, Poppy — Duck, Eagle, Brain, 
Excrements, Cat, Menstrual Blood, Marrow, Juices, Sweat, Blood. 

MERCURY $ 

Acacia, Cinnamon, Cassia, Carnation, Incense, Marjoram, Mastic, Pim- 
pernel, Parsley — Eagle, Ibis, Blood. 

MARS & 

Garlic, Asparagus, Balsam, Bdellium, Thisde, Cypress, Hellebore, Spurge, 
Magnetite, Nettle, Plantain, Mustard, Sulfur — Eagle, Owl, Bile, Genitals, Blood. 

VENUS 9 

Aloe, Amber, Orange, Maidenhair Fern, Coriander, Laudanum, Myrtle, 
Musk, Rose, Sandalwood, Thyme, Valerian, Verbain, Violet — Eagle, Cat, 
Blood, Testicles. 



246 
OPUS MAGICUM; PERFUMES 

JUPITER 4 

Holly, Aloe, Benzoin, Beech, Ash, Carnation, Hyacinth, Henbane, Iris, Al- 
mond, Manna, Mastic, Mint, Nutmeg, Peony, Pine, Oak, Rhubarb, Storax, 
Plum, Vine, Violet, Sugar — Lamb, Eagle, Horsetail, Blood, 

SATURN ft 

Aconite, Asphodel, Benzoin, Hemlock, Cypress, Coriander, Costus, Helle- 
bore, Henbane, Mandrake, Myrrh, Poppy, Pine, Resin, Radish, Rue, Celery 
Snakeroot — Eagle, Owl, Cat, Hair, Blood. 

The following is a brief list of the most used fragrances arranged according 
to the planets and the days corresponding to them: 



SUNDAY 





Saffron, Balsam, Incense 


MONDAY 


2 


Poppy, Camphor, Myrrh 


TUESDAY 


d 1 


Spurge, Hellebore 


WEDNESDAY 


S 


Mastic, Carnation 


THURSDAY 


4 


Ash, Storax, Benzoin 


FRIDAY 


9 


Musk, Amber, Aloe 


SATURDAY 


n 


Poppy, Mandrake, Magnetite 



And according to the constellations and the months: 



APRIL 


T 


Costus 


MAY 


b 


Mastic 


JUNE 


H 


Camphor 


JULY 


® 


Incense 


AUGUST 


SI 


Sandalwood 


SEPTEMBER 


up 


Magnetite 


OCTOBER 


_n_ 


Opopanax 


NOVEMBER 


nv 


Aloe 


DECEMBER 


^ 


Agrimony 







247 




OPUS MAGICUM: PERFUMES 


JANUARY 


V? 


Spurge 


FEBRUARY 




Thyme 


MARCH 


X 


Myrrh 



Keep in mind that, generally speaking, every type of gum is under the 
signature of the Sun; the leaves, the Moon; the woods, Mars; the barks, 
Mercury; the fruits, Jupiter; the flowers, Venus; and the roots, Saturn. 




1 will remind the readers that in the harmony of operations, the perfumes 
correspond also to colors and sounds. Some instruments have recently 
been invented whose keyboards do not correspond to notes, but to bright 
flashes, or splashes of perfumes. Bacon, and more recently, G. B. Allen and 
H. Field, have tried to establish a musical scale of colors and odors. For the 
latter, it is interesting to see the "gamma di Pierre" reported by Hubert 
(Plantes aparfums, Paris: Donud & Pinat, 1505). 

The processes of extraction of odorous substances are usually: desicca- 
tion, pulverization, solutions, distillations, tinctures, alcoholates, essen- 
tial oils, oils for infusions, and ointments. 1 have mentioned some of these 
procedures in reference to magical herbs (Ignis, 1925, p. 336), 

White common perfumes are produced by one or more of the above- 
mentioned means, for the purposes of Magic the substances are directly 
placed on a brazier, where the heat of the burning coals causes their odor- 
iferous principles to volatilize. 

Remember that, except in particular cases, the matter being placed on 
the brazier must not burn. 

The smokes that arise are not to be sniffed through either a rapid or a 
slow inspiration and expiration, as we do with perfumes; rather, they need 
to be breathed in long and deeply the breath held for a short time, and 
then exhaled /irmly and slowly. Thus the fluidic body may act upon them 
vampirically, absorbing their vital essence and placing itself on the particu- 
lar harmonic plane. 

I could write at length about the "vampiric" power of the astral body; it 
is enough to mention that the essential characteristic of this power is to 



248 
OPUS MAGICVM: PERFUMES 

inhale the vital fluid in order to transmit it to the organism and to feed it. 

What I have said here is enough to suggest an experiment; to inhale the 
perfume of unpicked flowers until one can even replace, up to a point, the 
usual food. 

Remember not to attempt this experiment with animal odors — and espe- 
cially with human ones (genital, armpit, and sweat in general) — and not to 
use them in magical operations without the specific instructions of somebody 
who is qualified. For a sufficient knowledge of what I mean, try observing 
the reactions that take place when you isolate yourself after inhaling three 
or four times with your face close to a towel used by another person (espe- 
cially of the opposite sex), and afterward concentrate yourself in rhythmic 
breathing and in silence. I must warn you that all these last forms of vampir- 
ism are extremely dangerous and harmful for those who operate or for those 
with whom they come into contact.' 12 * 

Among the most frequently employed fragrances are incense and myrrh, 
both with a generic solar attribute. They can be used under any sign, but 
then they act on different planes, with reactions that, though not antago- 
nistic, are not able to complete each other for a perfect union in the total 
result. 

Incense is the magical fragrance par excellence, since it has a power of 
fluidic condensation greater than any other. For this reason it is not suit- 
able to use it in operations that do not have an absolutely determined 
purpose aimed at producing apparitions, or the like. Myrrh is useful in 
those operations the objective of which is contact with the natural forces. 

Eucalyptus will be used in all the theurgical operations and in those 
that establish relationships between intelligences. 

We know that we are the first to employ and to introduce this plant in 
the use of magical operations. Eucalyptus, known since 1790, was intro- 
duced first in England; from there it went to France, eventually reaching 
the entire continent at the recent date of 1856, thanks to Ramel. 



123. They are dangerous for him who operates, in the form of astral infections, poison- 
ings, and even possessions. However, those who remain alert and active, by psychically 
breathing in the odor of a nearby person, may place themselves on their "ascendant'* and 
thus more easily submit it to their own occult influence. (Note by UR) 



249 
OPUS MAG1CUM: PERFUMES 

Eucalyptus belongs to the family oiMirtaceae, which is a group of the 
leptosperm plants. It originated in Australia and in the islands of the In- 
dian archipelago; it comprises about 150 species. From the distillation of 
its leaves and wood it is possible to obtain a fragrant oil (eucalyptol: 
C, 4 H 20 O 2 ), which is similar to camphor. This oil does not dissolve easily in 
water, but dissolves well in alcohol and in ether, which, variously pro- 
cessed, is used in the pharmaceutical, perfume, and liquor industries. 

The fruit, which we also use, is marked by a solar character, and it 
contains, in a wonderful synthesis, even the characters of the elements. 
Heat melts and evaporates the essence with which the fruit is saturated. It 
reacts harmonically on different zones, with particular emphasis on the 
higher faculties. 

Eucalyptus may be used as a universal fragrance, because it is the only 
one that possesses all the elementary characters. When combined with a 
touch of incense and myrrh, it is the most useful in magical operations. 



Arvo 



Conscious Thought" 
Relaxation- Silence 



T h 



he familiarity that those who write in a serious manner about esotericism 
have with particular states and qualities of the spirit often causes them to 
abbreviate what they have to say. I do not intend to underrate my readers , 
but since this publication is accessible to everyone, and considering that 
we started off with the intention not to omit anything for the sake of clar- 
ity it would not be a bad idea to return to some issues of intonation. The 
following simple remarks that 1 am going to make are meant as a contribu- 
tion toward developing practice; besides } they are not even my own. 124 

Quite often, overlooked details are the cause of failure. Moreover, an 
erroneous attitude that is not corrected in the beginning may negatively 
affect the entire development process. 

Thought that is power — How are we to understand 0, namely thought 
that is power? 

1) First and foremost as conscious thought or as living awareness of thought. 
The first thing to understand is that we usually do not have a true aware- 
ness of thought: we think, have thoughts, and that is all. Thus we first need 
to realize conscious thought. 

In a calm moment, fix your attention in this knowledge: 

I THINK! 

Realize that thought manifests the same power as Being. By thinking, 
you are. That which keeps you standing and without which you would 
collapse as an incoherent bundle of inanimate things is thought. You are at 



124. Some of the suggestions I set forth can be found in the German "Neugetst" 
movement. Cf., e.g., K. O. Schmidt, Selbst-und Lebensbemeisterung durch Gedankenkraft, 
and Wie konzentriere ich mich? (Baum Verlag, Pfullingen) 



253 
CONSCIOUS THOUGHT— RELAXATION— SILENCE 

the center of this force and of this unity, when you let the magical formula 
echo in you, as you are fully awake: 

I THINK! 1AM! 

2) Conscious thought . . . But this is already a second stage, since you 
feel that thought is a force. Concentrate in your thought with this aware- 
ness: "In me there is a force that is power and command. 1 ' You will have 
the sense of that which is intellectual power: Here lies the principle of magi- 
cal force, rather than in ordinary "will." Thought, integrated into the aware- 
ness that it is f who thinks, reveals a superior form of action: it is a source 
of evidence and certainty that is transformed into the sense that 1 can act, 
and eventually into a direct realizing force. 

3) This thought animated by an inner force is right thought. As you 
concentrate, reflect on that which is false thought; it is sophistic, destruc- 
tive, nervous, uncertain, restless, external; it is thinking with no continu- 
ity, halfhearted, distracted, that shifts from one thought to the next, from 
sensation to sensation. Oppose to it the new sense of positive thought, of 
thought fulfilled, of thinking that is wholesome and straight, a thinking 
with resolution, with clear goals, without hesitation or uncertainty. When 
you act, the formulas must be positive, calm, rhythmical, precise, well 
balanced throughout, and conscious. 

4) Thought must seek unity and shun multiplicity Thinking is realized 
as power when only one thought dominates the mind and directs it unfail- 
ingly and flexibly toward only one purpose, which is located at the center 
of the entire being, as if it were the only existing thing in the world. Then 
thought becomes plastic and creative. To know very well what one wants, 
to fix and will its plastic image without interruption, flexibly, in unison 
with the entire body, is to gather a system of occult forces into a power of 
realization, 

5) This concentration must be active to the highest degree. Every fear, 
worry, hope, desire, and hatred leads to a concentration, but a negative one. 
Instead, you must start from a state of mental equilibrium, and, as you 
proceed, you must nourish, nurture, saturate your thought through in- 
tensification and a special exaltation. You must animate your drought until 
you get to the point where you can feel; I can. In regard to this, Eliphas Levi 
says that he who knows the two opposite currents of the "Great Magical 



254 
CONSCIOUS THOUGHT— RELAXATION— SILENCE 

Agent" or "Astral Light," and also knows the art of their equilibrium, pos- 
sesses the key to power. This is very true. 

6) Finally, thought that is power is the thought of a free mind; it is the 
thought that has a solar character — and indeed it is the thought that is also 
fire of love. As long as you are preoccupied only with your own person and 
your "Self," with all its immediate interests and passions; as long as you 
experience other beings and things as an external and foreign reality and are 
enslaved, when confronting them, to instinctive reactions — until then, you 
are not free and the power of your mind remains limited just as your body is 
limited in space. Conversely solarity is radiating virtue; freedom is being 
open, knowing how to recover in one's self and to emanate a current of life 
that makes one feel other beings, in sympathy even when they oppose one 
and hate one. It is at that point that limits are pushed back. From an occult 
perspective, you first need to love those whom you will strike, even when you 
aim to kill than, But when the opening of your mind acquires the meaning of 
giving, of recovering and transmitting your strength and your fire in order to 
lift upward and lead forward — then you will experience a mysterious flow 
of energies that give life, as well as light and incomparable certainty, to the 
acting thought. This is the highest degree of right thought, or 0. 

Follow my advice: for an entire week, in the calm of the evening, fully 
realize that which is the first quality of creating thought, namely conscious 
thought. Imagine in a living way all that 1 have told you about it. Practice 
until you have completely understood all that this word encompasses. Then 
take a second week and do the same concerning the second point, namely 
thought as force. Then do the same for the rest. Believe that if you will do all 
this with a serious and right effort, these few weeks can really lead you to an 
awakening. You will already possess the beginning of the right direction. 

The alchemists used to say that one should not look for "matter" too 
far away, for it is not rare, but within everybody's reach, and is employed 
for vulgar uses. One of the lasting meanings of this expression is that magical 
power is not to be found God knows where or only by a few people who 
know awesome secrets. Rather, it is asleep in the ordinary thought of people. 
In order to awaken it, it is sufficient to become aware of it, namely to awaken, 
by transforming one's attitude, which consists of inertia and absence, to- 
ward thought. 



255 

CONSCIOUS THOUGHT—RELAXATION— SILENCE 

Relaxation — Abraxas has called attention to the fact that in magical 
operations everything that is effort, resistance, or reaction on the part of 
the body must be excluded. This means that one needs to learn first of all 
the faculty of relaxation (detente, Entspannung) , which is not achieved 
through violence, but in a calm and rhythmic way, through conscious com- 
mand of thought. 

In order to attain a complete relaxation, you need to proceed step-by- 
step — beginning by focusing your attention on a finger and imagining it to 
be lifeless, abandoned, dead, and then to shift to the other fingers, to the 
hand, to the forearm, and then to the whole arm. Realize this formula: 

"I am taking away alt the strength from the muscles of my arm. The muscles 
are totally asleep. They are relaxed. I do not feel my arm: it is asleep, it is 
completely asleep and relaxed. It is a mass of lifeless bronze." 

In the same way mentally travel through the various parts of your legs, 
progressively from below, using the same self-suggestion, employing the 
same mental command: feel the way all the tension melts away as if it were 
snow placed on a burning stove. Finally regard the entire body with this 
conscious thought: 

"All my muscles are relaxed. They are totally relaxed. I feel — I am relaxed, 
I am calm. I am relaxed. " 

And then: 

"I am absolutely calm. Everything in me is relaxed, untied. I am calm, 
calm, 1 am rhythmical proportion, cosmic harmony . . ." 

Continue to practice these exercises with goodwill until you can imple- 
ment them in a few seconds. Do them self-consciously and with zeal. Soon, it 
will be possible to completely relax your body at will, through the mere 
mental command, or through the mere evocation of a plastic mental image. 

Silence — After physical relaxation comes inner relaxation, or Silence. 
Bodily sensations have disappeared, thoughts become less frequent and 
slower, while you remain without being impatient, dwelling in a conscious 
calm. Realize this formula: 

"The external world has disappeared. 1 am alone — deep within my- 
self ... I remain silent. I am calm. I think and feel that I am complete calm, 
I am calm and everything in me is calm. Everything in me is calm and 
infinite peace. 



256 
CONSCIOUS THOUGHT— RELAXATION—SILENCE 

I — am — free calm . . . " 

After that, think of nothing else. Remain in this state. Allow the occa- 
sional plastic, living image to flash through your mind. 

Calm — as in a distant, deep, abandoned grave. 

Calm — as at the bottom of a clear, transparent alpine lake. 

Calm — as a night filled with stars. 

Calm — as a small town under the blazing summer sun, deserted, calm, 
noiseless, completely spread out, waiting for the cool of the night. 

In fact, you are here waiting for the night in which the spiritual su?i 
rises and in which occurs the miracle of interiority, the birth of the spiritual 
man. 

In this calm, the mind is dissolved. And the thought that is evoked 
there and prepared according to the Hermetic art — is magic. 



Ea 



Considerations on Magic 
and Its Powers 



C 



• onsidering the frequent use in these essays of the term "magic," we 
need to specify what it essentially means to us, and to defend the legiti- 
macy we attribute to it. 

Aside from modern caricatures of magical disciplines that, especially 
among Anglo-Saxons, are confused with methods aimed at "becoming 
strong," at acquiring "personal magnetism," or at achieving "success in 
life," etc, in the ancient and traditional world the term "magic" likewise 
often did not refer to a very high spiritual level. It could indicate a body of 
techniques aimed at using forces that were not merely physical, but which 
also did not necessarily have a spiritual character, any more than the use, 
in their own field, of the forces and powers proper to modern technology. 
In some instances, magic was a profession of sorts, and operations of this 
cheap kind of magic could even be performed on behalf of other people. 

However, it would be arbitrary to limit all magic to this inferior level 
Let us say that those who, coming from different points of view, try to limit 
the term "magic" to this meaning demonstrate a partial and shortsighted 
mentality that is real, even if they do not realize it. 

Even in matters of mere technology, it is not necessary to make this 
restricted use of the term "magic." We may recall that the representatives 
of the ancient Mazdean (Persian) cult of the God of Light were called "Magi," 
and were not devoted to magic in the limited and common sense of the 
word; on the contrary, it seems that the term derives from an ancient Aryan- 
Iranian root, found, for instance, in the German verb mogen meaning power 
in the wider sense of the word. After all, in the very tradition (i.e., Chris- 
tianity) that constantly attributed to the term "magic" every possible dark 
meaning of "accursed science," there was no problem in retaining the word 
"magi" for the three mysterious personages who greeted the birth of Jesus. 



258 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

As every practitioner of esoteric disciplines knows, these characters are not 
figures found in fairy tales, but rather the representatives of well-defined 
initiatic dignities. Even during the Middle Ages, the term "magic" did not 
have the restrictive sense I have mentioned. If anything, this term could be 
applied to what, at the time, was called "natural magic, 1 ' in contrast to 
which Agrippa — to cite him alone — conceived a heavenly magic and a di- 
vine magic as disciplines that had very different goals and dignities. A very 
interesting testimony on the matter that we need to recall is the use that 
the Italian Hermetic scholar Cesare della Riviera made of the terms "magic" 
and "magical" in his work II mondo magico de gli eroi (The Magical World 
of the Heroes), which was first published at the beginning of the seven- 
teenth century. In this text, magic is conceived as synonymous with the art 
of those who know how to reopen the path leading to the earthly paradise, 
in order to partake of the "Tree of Life" found at its center. This obviously 
refers to the restoration of that primordial state, reintegration of power, 
and contact with the "center" which constitute the main goal of initiation 
as such. An interesting detail (the reason that it is interesting will be ex- 
plained further on) is that according to della Riviera, the "magical world" 
was one and the same as the "world of heroes," and those who pursue the 
magical path are called by him "regal disciples of high Jupiter," 

All this shows that it is permissable to use the term "magic" without 
confusing it with the empirical practice of psychic powers, referring high 
magic instead to a particular way of understanding the same initiatic sci- 
ence. We may even admit that this meaning comes closer to the ancient 
term theurgy. But in this case we need to make some reservations, since, 
literally speaking, a "theurgist" means both "maker of divine works" as 
well as "maker of gods." In the latter case, the theurgical art is the art of 
turning certain powers that are awakened or evoked from above into appa- 
ritions; in this case, theurgy would be something that falls more or less 
within the realm of what used to be called "ceremonial magic." Ceremo- 
nial magic, as far the spiritual level is concerned, ranks lower than high 
magic, which is the subject of this essay. 

There is a twofold reason that we want to retain the term "magic." 
First of all, we want to emphasize the character of an experimental 
science and technique that is essential to the initiatic path in general and 
which distinguishes magic from everything that is mysticism, mediumism, 



258 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

As every practitioner of esoteric disciplines knows, these characters are not 
figures found in fairy tales, but rather the representatives of well-defined 
initiatic dignities. Even during the Middle Ages, the term "magic" did not 
have the restrictive sense I have mentioned. If anything, this term could be 
applied to what, at the time, was called "natural magic," in contrast to 
which Agrippa — to cite him alone — conceived a heavenly magic and a di- 
vine magic as disciplines that had very different goals and dignities. A very 
interesting testimony on the matter that we need to recall is the use that 
the Italian Hermetic scholar Cesare della Riviera made of the terms "magic" 
and "magical" in his work II mondo magico de gli eroi (The Magical World 
of the Heroes), which was first published at the beginning of the seven- 
teenth century. In this text, magic is conceived as synonymous with the art 
of those who know how to reopen the path leading to the earthly paradise, 
in order to partake of the "Tree of Life" found at its center. This obviously 
refers to the restoration of that primordial state, reintegration of power, 
and contact with the "center" which constitute the main goal of initiation 
as such. An interesting detail (the reason that it is interesting will be ex- 
plained further on) is that according to della Riviera, the "magical world" 
was one and the same as the "world of heroes," and those who pursue the 
magical path are called by him "regal disciples of high Jupiter." 

All this shows that it is permissable to use the term "magic" without 
confusing it with the empirical practice of psychic powers, referring high 
magic instead to a particular way of understanding the same initiatic sci- 
ence. We may even admit that this meaning comes closer to the ancient 
term theurgy. But in this case we need to make some reservations, since, 
literally speaking, a "theurgist" means both "maker of divine works" as 
well as "maker of gods." In the latter case, the theurgical art is the art of 
turning certain powers that are awakened or evoked from above into appa- 
ritions; in this case, theurgy would be something that falls more or less 
within the realm of what used to be called "ceremonial magic." Ceremo- 
nial magic, as far the spiritual level is concerned, ranks lower than high 
magic, which is the subject of this essay. 

There is a twofold reason that we want to retain the term "magic," 
First of all, we want to emphasize the character of an experimental 
science and technique that is essential to the initiatic path in general and 
which distinguishes magic from everything that is mysticism, mediumism, 



259 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

and the like. In passing, we may note that in the body of positive religions 
the magical component is present in everything that is ritual with a defi- 
nite and objective character, as opposed to the purely subjective and psy- 
chological domain of faith, sentiments, and states of mind. 

The second reason is that despite all its counterfeits and fairy-tale ad- 
aptations, the figure of the magus retains in a highly visible way the ideal 
of spiritual virility, which is most essential for the higher type of the ini- 
tiate or adept. The magus has always called to mind the ideal of a dominat- 
ing superiority. 

With this I w r ant to point to an order of ideas that is very important for 
us, because it defines the tradition to which we are connecting ourselves. 
However, it is necessary to start a little further back. It is fairly easy to 
recognize in the body of ancient civilizations the presence of two suffi- 
ciently distinct traditions that maybe defined as the regal tradition and the 
priestly tradition. In the beginning, these two traditions were one and the 
same; a differentiation occurred at a later time, and it should be under- 
Stood as being between two different ways of embodying the primordial 
spirituality and perpetuating what is called the primordial tradition. On 
this basis, several interferences and reciprocal integrations of the regal tra- 
dition with the priestly tradition have been possible. However, if we see in 
the priest one who simply mediates the relationship between the human 
and the divine worlds, and if in the king (according to his original dignity) 
we recognize one who is instead a directly divine being, so that he repre- 
sents with his mere presence a mediating function — then we must recog- 
nize that the regal tradition is much closer than the priestly tradition to 
the primordial tradition, and consequently to the supreme ideal of 
adeptship. This priority can hardly be contested if we have in mind what 
the traditional royalty represented, for instance, in ancient Egypt, Iran, 
China, Peru, Japan, and even in ancient Rome. In reference to Rome, it 
will be helpful to remember that the title pontifex maximus was a regal title, 
a title of the augnstus or Roman Emperor (as it had been at the origins of 
Rome). By borrowing it and applying it to the leader of a merely priestly 
hierarchy, Catholicism was guilty of little less than an usurpation. Now, if 
the magical dignity, as we have said, leads one to think spontaneously of a 
spiritual virility and a dominating superiority, then the relationship that it 
has with the tradition of initiatic regality becomes evident, as does the 



260 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

converse: that it is this very tradition that legitimates it and confers on it 
the fullness of its meaning vis-a-vis the limitations proper to every spiritu- 
ality of a priestly type. It is irrelevant that the tradition of initiatic regality 
has long disappeared as a source of adepts such as visible heads of peoples 
and states: the secret tradition of initiatic regality has existed and contin- 
ues to exist in its proper place, alongside the tradition of initiation in gen- 
eral It is no coincidence that Hermeticism speaks of a "Royal Art' 5 and of 
a rex physicorum (king of physical things); that the Rosicrucians referred 
to an imperator (emperor); and that even in the degenerate residues and 
counterfeits of modern Freemasonry there are dignities that are connected 
to the ideal of the "Holy Empire." 

But there are other aspects to this matter. One concerns the qualifica- 
tions: these are not the same for the royal and priestly dignities. In the 
former, what matters the most is a spiritual race of wairiors and heroes. 
There is a very significant tradition present that fits perfectly in the order 
of ideas explained here. Hesiod relates the traditional teaching concerning 
the four ages that correspond to the various phases of involution and de- 
scent of the most recent cycle of humanity It was no coincidence that 
Hesiod defined as a generation of heroes the one to which Jupiter/Zeus 
gave the opportunity of participating anew in the primordial state, despite 
the approach of the last age, or the "Age of Iron"; this participation corre- 
sponds to initiatic reintegration. Thus the reader can understand why della 
Riviera spoke of "heroes," of "regal disciples of high Jupiter" (Jupiter was 
always considered as the god of kings), and of a "magical world of heroes/' 
and also why we have thought it important to draw attention to this testi- 
mony, which, after all, is not isolated and which supports the traditional 
and orthodox character of such an order of ideas. 

There is another aspect that is also important and needs to be exam- 
ined. The upper limit (if we can call it this) of the priestly tradition is an 
asceticism of pure contemplation and an orientation of the spirit that gives 
special emphasis to the sphere of knowledge, instead of the sphere of ac- 
tion. Naturally, when rising toward the higher regions of the spirit, the 
differences become less pronounced. Wherever one talks about knowl- 
edge (as long as there is any reference to the initiatic order) one also means 
realization, just as the term theoria, according to its original Greek mean- 
ing, often translated as "contemplation," implies, unlike the meanings that 



261 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

became dominant later on, something active, namely the act of pure 
thought. This does not prevent a residue of difference, at least in matters 
of emphasis: those who insist too much on the path of knowledge and 
claim primacy for it are bound to feel the same diffidence toward the magi- 
cal path and the same animus that the priest had toward the royal adept. 

On a lower plane, the most typical instance of this animus is found in 
Christianity. Christianity has the character of one of the most unilateral 
priestly traditions that have ever developed, to the point of becoming a mere 
religion devoid of every esoteric dimension. Thus the attitude of Chris- 
tianity against everything that resembles "magic" has always been symp- 
tomatic; Christianity did not hesitate to associate with "magic" and "dia- 
bolical arts" everything that, in general, pertains to the world of initiation. 
But even on a higher plane, there are those who, while fully recognizing 
the dignity and meaning of the imtiatic path through understanding it 
unilaterally in terms of "knowledge," are more or less inclined to discredit 
the notion of magic, confining it to the context of a questionable science of 
manipulation of subtle powers. However, what we have expounded so far 
shows thai this restriction is arbitrary, and points out the influence respon- 
sible for this bias. At the same time, we have confirmed the legitimacy of 
making magic a synonym of the ars regia and the initiatic science of the Self, 




Following these considerations of a theoretical character, 1 wish to empha- 
size some points related to the magical domain and the initiatic concept of 
powers. 

1) According to an initiatic axiom, "You must not seek power; it is power 
that must seek you." In our tradition, power is feminine and seeks a center: 
he who knows how to give a center to this power through his own renun- 
ciation (hoping our use of the word will be understood) and hardness cre- 
ated by domination of his soul, by isolation and resistance — power is un- 
failingly attracted to such a person and obeys him as her own male. Just as 
water naturally forms a vortex around a pillar standing steadfast in its 
current, likewise, in a spontaneous way, an aura forms around him who, 
like a force that presses on and does not stop at anything, appropriates the 
way of being. Being is the condition of power; an impassibility {we could 



262 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

even say a frigidity) that does not look at it, is what attracts it. Power 
eludes desire for power, like a woman shunning the lustful embrace of an 
impotent lover, 

2) Those who understand this also understand the nature of the continu- 
ous dangers connected to the powers. Every power is for the Self like a 
vertigo of subtle energy that is fixed and chained by its "central" quality. If 
one's inner resolution fails even for an instant (namely the being due to which 
a power is attracted by the initiate and subjected to him), this power will 
overwhelm one and cut one down. In such cases the consequence is usually 
a regression to a state that is even lower than the one from which he started. 
The powers are transformed into beings that possess him who has fallen, 

3) Sometimes mention is made of a "rejection of powers," This is non- 
sense, just like that "renunciation of nirvana" spoken of in some Theosophi- 
cal milieus. Nirvana is not like a dwelling place where one can enter or exit 
at will Niryana is a state of being; once it is realized, one cannot "give it 
up" for the simple fact that it constitutes, once and for all, an integral part 
of the being. Likewise, it is possible to talk about a renunciation of the use 
of powers, which is the same thing as having power resting in the state of 
simple possibility; however, talk of a rejection of powers is nonsense, be- 
cause they are connected in a natural way to the metaphysical dignity of 
the initiate, and are in a certain way its chrism. Powers could be rejected 
only if one could renounce that dignity; this, however, is impossible for 
the same reason as given in regard to nirvana. 

At any rate, it is certain that powers, far from being the pleasant and 
desirable things that a profane person imagines them to be, are such that 
one who has them without having requested them would gladly and freely 
get rid of them if only one could. This can be felt in an analogous way by 
thinking of dignities and leadership positions in human society which 
imply not only risks, but also a high degree of burdens and responsibili- 
ties: responsibility first of all, toward oneself. 

4) The attraction that the notion of magical powers exercises on the 
common mind is based on a gross misunderstanding. What is conceived is 
an ordinary person with his various desires, goals, passions, and interests, 
then he is imagined to be invested with powers. However, nothing is fur- 
ther from the truth. The subject invested with powers, or the magus, is a 



263 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

being who is substantially different from an ordinary person and has noth- 
ing in common with him; it is a real change of state that has endowed the 
magus with powers. (This is true at least for the domain of high magic; 
things may go otherwise in the magic that, without moralizing, we call 
"black magic," which is more or less the same as witchcraft.) What hap- 
pens is that most of what an ordinary person would want to do and achieve 
through "powers" ceases almost entirely to be of interest to those who 
have achieved the state that introduces them to the real possession of those 
powers. This is truer the more one ascends (or gains depth, which is an- 
other phrase for the same thing), and is the reason that those who can do 
the most show it the least. 

5) Among many people one finds a fairly childish view of magical ac- 
tion, almost like that of a fact determined without a causal connection — 
more or less as with the magic wands of fairy tales, which ipso facto auto- 
matically produce this or that effect. Even if one does not refer to magic 
wands but to mysterious formulas or secret signs that allegedly have an 
analogous power, the intellectual horizon remains unchanged. In passing, 
1 note that for a similar example, one should turn not to the world of 
magic, but rather to modern technology. The power to blow up a rock by 
pushing a button, or even lighting a fire by striking a match, belongs to 
this type: 1 am here, an effect is produced there, automatically, "magically" 
by a power that is not mine, that is unintelligible and extraneous to me 
even though 1 may know well its modalities or its habits. Moreover, such 
magical technology aliow T s for possibilities that high magic prefers to ex- 
clude, for reasons shown in the previous paragraph: one can make an in- 
different use of it for any desire or purpose of any human individual. 

On the contrary, the true magical act, from the point of view of inner 
experience, is exactly the opposite of the miracle, in its supposed sense as 
an incomprehensible and wonderful phenomenon. The magical act ema- 
nates from a state of absolute evidence-knowledge; the meaning of a direct, 
real causality, or of the power that immediately produces an effect, is in- 
separable from it. This effect is realized in function of its causes, and the 
cause is one and the same with the state of an integrated life and its achieve- 
ments. The reader may recall that we have already dealt with this when 
talking about the initiatic view of knowledge. 



264 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

We need only to add that formulas, rituals, and signs that originally 
were only used as references and auxiliary tools for actions that had such 
and such a meaning due to a process of degeneration may have been passed 
on through the ages without being understood. This does not mean that, 
thanks to all the subtle factors connected with it and to a power of indirect 
reactions on the operator (which is what is really going on when one thinks 
that everything is reduced to the power of autosuggestion and to the means 
of creating it), the use of those inherited magical instruments may con- 
tinue, in given circumstances, to produce the same elfects. These effects, 
then, may be regarded as "magical" in the bad and miraculous sense of the 
word, precisely because in such cases the causal process for the most part 
eludes clear consciousness. 

6) The point we have discussed leads us back to operations that are an 
exercise of powers and do not have an exclusively initiatic goal We must 
admit that several instructions of magic transmitted in these pages refer 
(at least potentially) to this plane, Is it possible to follow the right path and 
yet give oneself over to such operations? What has been said in point 4 
still retains its validity. However, it is possible to conceive an intermediate 
phase in which the magical experience can have the meaning and value of 
some kind of sport, not in a derogatory sense, but as a training of forces 
and organs that do not belong to the physical and bodily plane and that are 
important for those who are beginning to lead a double life in the visible 
and in the invisible. We must also add that just as a healthy sport fosters 
the qualities of discipline, courage, perseverance, and lucid control over 
the situation, analogous developments (naturally of a higher quality and 
at a higher level) have come from the actions and experiences mentioned 
above, which cannot but be very helpful for initiatic realizations in the 
proper sense. One needs only to recognize the limit beyond which, just as 
in the case of physical sport, there no longer is a development, but a devia- 
tion, since one may end up attributing value to contingent things. 

We finally need to ask this last question. Is it conceivable to use power 
when it is neither conceived in the absurd terms mentioned in point 4 
(namely for the personal satisfaction of human passions and desires), nor 
has the very contingent and subordinate goal just mentioned? We may 
answer in the affirmative. In the first place, on the initiatic path and on a 



265 
CONSIDERATIONS ON MAGIC AND ITS POWERS 

transcendent plane in general, since there are specific traditions in which 
the capacity to act constitutes a trial, overcoming which leads from the 
"passive identity" typical of a cosmic-ecstatic beatitude to the "active iden- 
tity" that is the true initiatic and "regal" realization of the Supreme Prin- 
ciple. This trial is mentioned in some esoteric Islamic teachings, and in the 
Hindu tradition the god Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita (IV, 6; IX, 8): 
"In me all the universes are already fulfilled; yet, by dominating my na- 
ture, I manifest myself among beings and I act," 125 

The last possibility to be considered is that of actions performed not on 
the way to fulfillment (which, after all, includes the very possibility just 
mentioned, though it represents the ultimate stage) but by an adept who 
has already completed this path. However, we can say very little about 
these possible actions, since they elude human measures and motives. What 
is certain is that at their base there cannot be particular passions or goals; 
not even notions of "good" and "evil" may inform them, since such no- 
tions and their opposition belong equally to the human sphere. That which 
has the quality of a cmter and "invariable middle" is equally distant from 
both, from "good" and "evil/ 1 and this same nature must inform the im- 
personal actions of those who have realized the connection of their es- 
sence with the "Center." 



125, This is the true meaning of what, in the domain of serious doctrine, may corre- 
spond to the above-mentioned "renunciation of nirvana" 



Abraxas 



Magic of the Image 



I 



n a being who has become alive, the mind is no longer "thought." Rather, 
it is activity that instantaneously determines reality through images. Through 
images the magus creates, destroys, and transforms into matter feelings 
and sensations that are within himself; through images he acts on his own 
organism; through images he operates on other people. To the material ac- 
tions and "will" of ordinary people he substitutes the power of the image. 

But in order to do so, it is necessary to awaken oneself to timeless speed 
in feeling, conceiving, halting, and intervening. The ordinary, slow, ob- 
tuse, and sluggish consciousness usually manages to perceive things at the 
speed of a sleepwalker. Acts escape it; consciousness opens its eyes only 
when the "precipitate," the "fallout," of the fact (the thing, the sensation, 
the material movement) is already there. Thus, what consciousness per- 
ceives are the shadows of phenomena and a world of knowledge as ac- 
knowledgment, but not of action (magic). 

In this sense you also understand the world you call "inner" as being of 
external phenomena and lunar; thus, you do not know and live the image 
as action, but as image. Its action is too fast, and you are not present in it. 
A mere echo, the image either "appears" by itself, or it may be simply 
"evoked." You do not know the creative relationship through which it could 
act from deep inside yourself (Latin imago ["image"] = imo ago ["1 act from 
the depth" ]). 

In order to acquire and perceive this rapidity of what is not yet "physi- 
cal," the mind must succeed in wresting itself free from the organ of the 
brain. The necessary condition for this is to "descend into hell" — that is, 
from the head into the "heart," as we have mentioned before. This is also 
the "bath" that breaks the chains of "gold" and frees it, drawing out of it 
the "winged" hermetic-alchemical symbol of rapidity that corresponds to 
the antelope, which in Hindu esotericism refers to the subtle "center" of 
the heart. 



267 
MAGIC OF THE IMAGE 

You already know that this "descent" leads to the perception of the 
"subtle" and the "volatile. 1 ' But the "subtle" is the second dimension of real- 
ity — in which reality is no longer exteriority in space and time, or discursive 
thought, but rather activity and rhythm. Then you are "reborn backwards." 
No longer hypnotized by the spectacle of things and ideas, you can detach 
yourself from them and perceive them in the act of their prenatural birth. 

However, this is a consciousness in which the image is transformed 
into a projection, or into an action in the pure state. Will is effort: desire is 
the tendency toward something that one does not have; the force is a middle 
point between a goal and a reality into which it tries to be transformed by 
overcoming a resistance. In the magical image, on the other hand, there is 
no effort, nor striving, nor an interval of fulfillment: it is acting that amounts 
to seeing, and a seeing that amounts to acting. The process of ideation is 
realization ipso facto. It does not have a future, and it is more rapid than 
the antithesis: its law is it is — the command-presence. 




Through images you can successfully stand up to feelings and passions, 
whenever they descend upon you, a struggling ascetic. If desire, fear, an- 
ger, sensations, hatred, lust, all of a sudden appeared in your mind, in your 
feeling and will, jump back and fix the feeling in an image: act upon it and 
the mental act will produce transformation and annihilation in the corre- 
sponding element. We read for instance in the Majjhima-nik&jo, XX, the 
simile of: 

"a young man who all of a sudden realized he had the rotting corpse of 
a serpent, or a dog, or another human being wrapped around his neck, 
being scared and overwhelmed with disgust, he would rip it off and throw 

it away," 

The feeling needs to be quickly associated with the image of a corpse, 
while the mind realizes the horror of the situation and the gesture of rip- 
ping it off and throwing it away The mental act, when it is strengthened in 
a material action, generates ritual and symbolic practice. I will discuss this 
later, though you may already perceive the meaning of it. In some moun- 
tains of northern Africa, for instance, there are found little mounds of stones, 



268 
MAGIC OF THE IMAGE 

which are considered to be saturated with an evil power. They have been 
created by a materialization of the mental act, with which, by fixing the 
effort of the ascent in the image of a stone, this very stone is hurled away 
Assume in a flexible way any thought or image of negation, mistrust, dis- 
traction, or that you simply do not wish to entertain; immediately imagine 
a hand pulling out a splinter that has pierced the skin and casting it away 
And if the element has already penetrated and sapped your strength, get 
rid of it "as a strong man, seizing a weaker man by the head or by the shoul- 
ders, compels him, crushes him, throws him down. " If a pain, an illness, or a 
sense of fatigue overtakes you, fix it in a flake of snow that melts when it 
falls on a mass of glowing white-hot metal. If any anxiety restlessness, 
desire, or mental fever attack you, turn them into the shadow of smoke 
that, in the fire of the mind, is dispersed in the pure, clean, blue sky The 
mind is fixed through the image of a fist that holds a little defenseless 
animal, until it stays still, motionless, inert; or through the image of an 
arrow shot at its target; or that of an ever-present iron bar that always 
parries every blow; or a hand that systematically grabs and leads the un- 
stable mind, which runs away every time an involuntary association of 
thoughts arises, back to its proper place (at the center). 

In order to free the mind, imagine the open sky, the air, or remember 
that "[liike a deep, clear, and transparent lake, this is how the wise become 
calm" (Dhammapada, VI, 82); or that "[a] 11 desires flow into him as waters 
flow into the ocean, which, ever-filled, never overflows but remains unchanged" 
(Bhagavad Gita, II, 70); or "Like a lamp that shines unmoving in a windless 
place' 7 (VI, 19). This last image can be represented through determination 
by imagining a flame that is still enveloped in smoke and mobile, in which 
a state upset by modifications that have not yet been dominated is eventu- 
ally fixed. 

About all this, be aware that first of all it is necessary to stop a thought 
or a feeling as soon as it emerges. It must be caught in midair, before it puts 
down roots in your soul and spreads there; you must prevent it, suffocate 
it while it is still in embryo. Become agile, elusive, ready to detach and 
extract yourself. 

Second, notice how well practice leads you back to the preparation of 
the Caduceus; the emotional state acts like a fluid mercury S that is fixed 
in the image, which is then ignified by the mental act 0; in other words, 



269 
MAGIC OF THE IMAGE 

everything depends on the rapid and complete amalgamation of sentiment 
and image, and on the active attitude to be maintained before the image. 
The entire mind must be concentrated on this image, as a bundle of solar 
rays is gathered up in the focus of a lens. 

In theurgical invocations, all the various images that express the at- 
tributes referring to entities or deities must be actualized in the fluid sense 
of one's entire being. The mind will shift from one to the next, performing 
a series of transformations that serve to produce the necessary exaltation, 
so that sympathy and communication may be established. 

A general image of great power is that of a dark body that is consumed 
and falls down, surrendering its place to a body made of radiant light and 
glorious strength. This image actually flashes at all moments of sudden or 
mortal danger, in an instant that is too fast to be perceived by ordinary 
human consciousness. It rises up and restores and transmits strength to 
the organism as the latter abandons itself and falls asleep. There is another 
image of such great power that it may overwhelm hostile forces even in the 
body: the image of a gigantic white skeleton, made of lightning bolts. 

If you persevere in these practices you will grow in the knowledge that 
thoughts and feelings are not incorporeal and "spiritual," floating in the 
air, but rather almost tangible moving objects, which can be handled, 
moved, projected, changed, put down, loaded and unloaded, each one 
endowed with its own form. This form can be seen and derives from the 
"sign" of the being that emanates those thoughts or feelings. 

Magical images can be invented, but you need to understand how much 
more efficacious are those that resemble the forms and the real signs of the 
states that they fix. Those who see may suggest images that afford more 
leverage for mental magic. These people also know the symbols that, hav- 
ing been realized plastically in the imagination, shape it and inform it, so 
as to establish a real, effective contact with the corresponding powers. The 
slow ascent of the Moon on the horizon and the Sun that rises, scattering 
the darkness, are two image-ways for communicating with the cosmic forces 
of destruction and creation, respectively. The sense of Light as well as that 
of Fire that are evoked during the phase of concentration propitiate the 
experience of the two aspects of the subtle body, and so forth. 

Having denied, exhausted, and extinguished everything that in his feel- 
ing and willing is craving or aversion, sympathy or antipathy, mania of 



270 
MAGIC OF THE IMAGE 

affirmation, attachment, selfishness, and instinctive reactions, being endowed 
with a steady, calm, collected, impassible mind, the magus, with a sover- 
eign glance, sees as figures the feelings that have descended upon him or 
on other people he is looking at. He can act directly on these images at 
will: it is enough for his mind to assume them and to project them trans- 
formed, or for his eye to change them with a glance of command, to pro- 
duce a corresponding change in the soul of the other person. 

Likewise, if he wishes he can evoke in himself the image of a certain 
feeling, turn it on, and saturate it with his fluid. If then, by focusing his mind 
on another person, and by inwardly actualizing the gesture of taking it from 
one place and placing it in another, he sees the image in the other person, in 
the heart, and that same feeling or state will be infused in him/her. 

These operations are possible even when one has not yet attained the 
vision, through images that are not real — meaning those that do not corre- 
spond to "signatures" — but invented, provided they have a sufficient sug- 
gestive and analogical power; provided that one knows how to fix in them 
the relative and given element; and, in the end, provided that the action 
does not go too deep, for then there will be very energetic resistances. 




Finally at its highest potency, the image stirs, enflames, and provokes res- 
urrection even in the world of natural things. 

The substance of nature is desire V. 

In the intelligence and in conscious will, the goal of movement is an 
idea, or an ideal to be fulfilled, or something that may be and yet is not; in 
other words, it is a possibility to be realized. But the appearance of desire 
ushers in identification, a dark directness of contact, and necessity. It brings 
the act increasingly closer to the realization it is striving toward: the dura- 
tion of the movement contracts, virtuality is confused with tendency and 
tendency with action. With the gradual shortening of the interval separat- 
ing movement and its purpose, the idea can no longer be distinguished, 
but is confused and precipitates in the act and in the object: it increasingly 
takes on the form of the being, and it becomes the being itself. Nothing 
now separates the agent and the action, the ideal and the real, the subject 



271 
MAGIC OF THE IMAGE 

and the object. This intelligence that sinks in its own act, which is blind 
yearning, thus becoming instinct, mechanism, automatism, or a vibrating 
and convulsive force absorbed into its objects — such is the deep essence of 
what appears to you as nature. Nature is the identification of the end with 
the beginning of an act, the degradation of freedom into something me- 
chanical; it is the precipitation of elementary intelligences that are lost in 
the blind tendency to persevere in the very act that constitutes them, in 
the substantiality of their "images," Thus, imprisoned in the materiality of 
things, signs and symbols are asleep, as abysmal images of light, gestures 
of power and illumination that the law of yearning has obscured and cru- 
cified in the sphere of fate. 126 

And even this contraction and acceleration, by which the idea leaves 
the sphere of freedom and degenerates into sensation, instinct, and nature, 
shows the timeless speed of acts that cross your mind without it being 
aware of them and retaining their perception. Thus, the mind itself sees 
only facts — things, beings, already in a form of exteriority, of ex-istence — 
and material movements in a series: these are the precipitates (in the chemi- 
cal sense) of the subtle world. 

But when you have succeeded in slaying desire, yearning, and dark 
striving within you; when you succeed in stopping and in fixing the irra- 
tional effort that dominates the depths of your being, and adjusted your- 
self to the magic rapidity in conceiving and in intervening — then you will 
be able to turn to an analogous realization in the sphere of nature. You will 
then stop in your spirit the acts of beings before they precipitate in the 
form of material things. At that point you will no longer be confronted 
with a material world, but with a world of images and your knowledge will 
consist in action, rather than passion. In your Yes (love, consent) you will 
live the dark forces of beings transfigured as intellectual acts. In your No 
(opposition, dominion), by projecting your strength O into the image that 
sustains the being's body of craving £, you will create a transcendental 
transformation that will be translated into an invisible following of your 
command on the part of that which, in the order of nature, depends on 
that being. This will happen because your consecration as the Released, 
the Uprooted, the Escaped One, is a power of freedom that imposes itself 



126. Cf. E Ravaisson, De YHabitude, Paris, 1927, pp. 36-40 5 44-45, 47, 50-51, 60. 



272 
MAGIC OF THE IMAGE 

on the demonic realm and on the law of necessity of the forces made of 
yearning, bringing them to a halt. 

Thus, as you progressively fix yourself, pulling yourself out of the "Wa- 
ters," your capability to intercept and to maintain the various energies and 
impressions at their subtle state will increase. Corresponding images will 
naturally flow into you, instead of the representation of reflected phenom- 
ena and apparitions recorded by physical senses: at first, the images of 
your inner psychological world (thoughts and feelings) and your own "fig- 
ure"; more deeply, the images buried within the organs and movements of 
your body Deeper yet, the signs of the kingdoms, the natural and stellar 
forces and influences, the Twelve and the Seven. 

And if it will be given to you to achieve adeptship, nothing will ever be 
able to act directly and contingently on you. Everything will confront you 
in the sudden apparition of an image that tries to be accepted and willed: 
the same will happen with fatigue, love, sickness, sleep, and what gradu- 
ally awakens and arises from the subterranean realm of instinct and physi- 
ological automatism. According to the law of necessity, the only images 
that will be allowed to overpower you are those images that your mind is 
unable to hold on to, in order to transform its obscurely demonic nature, 
its blind spontaneity, into Sun. 



Pietro Negri 

An Italian Alchemical Text 
on Lead Tablets 



I 



n 1910 a small work appeared entitled: A Little Book of Alchemy Written 
on Lead Plates in the 14 th Century, preserved in the library of the late Prof. 
Scipio Lapi. Published with an introduction, notes, and 13 facsimiles by 
Angelo Marinelli, with a preface by Prof Cesare Annibaldi Citta di Castello 
Tipografia dello Stabilmento S. Lapi, 1910, in 8vo, 62 pages," 

The original leaden text is a "rectangular, 36-page booklet, numbered 
on recto and verso, made of lead plates about one millimeter thick," Ac- 
cording to both Marinelli and Annibaldi, the book dates undoubtedly to 
the fourteenth century. However, Carbonelli, in one of his works (Giovanni 
Carbonelli, Sullefonti storiche della Chimica e delVAlchimia in Italia, Rome, 
1925), has written about this booklet and compared it to another similar 
leaden text preserved in the Florentine Diplomatic Archive. Carbonelli 
traced both of these texts to the same period: according to him they are 
written in characters of the first half of the sixteenth century We believe, 
and will give our reasons, that the booklet published by Marinelli is an 
even later text, dating from the first half of the seventeenth century, to be 
precise. As far as the second text is concerned, on which Cesare Guasti 
lectured in 1859 (a lecture found in Guasti's Opere, vol. Ill, part I, pp. 93- 
102, Prato, 1896), it is if anything a little earlier than the first. The issue at 
stake is not merely of a scholarly nature: among other things, it is con- 
nected to a matter of a very arduous and controversial historical nature, 
namely the relationship between Hermeticism and Freemasonry. 

On the cover of the booklet, which has a faceted back, we see in the middle 
of the first page the image of the sun with a man's face, surrounded by 
alternating straight and wavy rays. In the middle of the fourth page we see 
the image of the crescent moon with a man's face, whose pointed beard 



274 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

forms one of the extremities. The text of the booklet is interposed with 
illustrations that have been reproduced (but not photographically) by 
Marinelli. As we refer to Marinelli's work, we will briefly describe these 
images, following the order of the context, thus reproducing step-by-step 
the text of the booklet. 

The first plate contains an elaborately adorned chariot, drawn above 
the clouds by four horses, in which is seated a fully dressed human figure, 
whose head is surrounded by a radiant aureole. This figure holds the reins 
in one hand and a whip with many cords in the. other. The face is beard- 
less — a detail that led Marinelli to conclude that it represents Dawn on her 
chariot illuminated by the sun, which can be seen in the upper- right corner. 

At the bottom of the illustration it reads; "Pater eius est Sol; mater eius 
est Luna" (Its father is the sun; its mother, the moon). This saying is from 
the "Emerald Tablet 11 attributed to Hermes, the "Father of Philosophers." 
The charioteer driving the four horses reminds one of Basilius Valentinus's 
"Triumphal Chariot of Antimony" (1604), and more exactly Nicholas 
Barnaud's "Auriga ad quadrigam auriferam" (1601). The closeness of the 
words auriga (charioteer) and aurum (gold) is very evident and typical of 
the Hermeticists' style. However, this comparison is etymologically incor- 
rect since auriga derives from the Sankrit rtrv = horse (the runner), though 
at Barnaud's time the comparison must have appeared undeniable and very 
suggestive. The four horses represent the four elements; the clouds tell us 
that this scene does not take place on earth, but in heaven; in other words, 
one should not look for a material meaning but rather for a spiritual one. 127 

On the second page of the booklet we see a bearded and half-naked 
man with a scythe, sitting on a small mound of earth, underneath a tree. 
On his chest is drawn the symbol of Saturn; at the bottom of the plate we 
read: "Hie est pater, et mater eius, sive lapis noster et philosophorum" (This is 
his father and mother, namely our stone and the philosophers' stone). The 
fact that this figure symbolizes Saturn can be ascertained by the scythe. Sat- 
urn, the Italic deity of sown fields (Varro wrote: cs ab satu dictus Saturnus" — 
Saturn is named from sowing), carries the scythe for the ensuing harvest. 



127. This can also mean that what we are dealing with here are operations and elements 
that refer to the. subtle plane. (Note by UR) 



275 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

It will come as no surprise to meet Saturn right at the start, especially 
when we think of the saturnia regno, (rule of Saturn) of the golden age. 

Alchemically speaking, Saturn is lead, namely the metal that our al- 
chemical text, as well as the other codex, is made of. Ancient Egyptian 
alchemists regarded lead as the progenitor of the other metals. Its name 
was also applied to any white and fusible metal or alloy, namely tin (white 
lead), and lead and tin alloys, which were likewise combined with anti- 
mony zinc, etc. Our lead is that which Pliny and the ancients called "black 
lead" (and this is the apparent etymology of the Latin word plumbeum) in 
contrast to white lead, namely tin. Lead ores often contain silver, so that 
when working with them it looked as if the only thing to do was to imitate 
and to help nature in the work of transmutation. The specific weight of the 
metal and the slow movement of the planet Saturn, the farthest from earth 
(Uranus and Neptune had not yet been discovered) , made lead a natural 
symbol for what in human beings is thick, slow, and heavy, namely the 
entire bodily organism. This correspondence is not merely the result of 
our induction, but a matter of fact, as can be seen in this ancient six-line 
French stanza; 

II est unepartie dans Vhomme 

Dont \e nam six lettres consomme. 

Si tuy vas un P adjoiutant 

Puis VS en M permutant 

Tu trouveras sans nul ambages 

Le vray nom du subjet des Sages. 

(There is a part in man 

Whose name is of six letters. 

If you will add a P 

Then change the S to M, 

You will find with no trouble 

The true name of the Matter of the Wise.) 

The third figure of our Hermetic booklet represents the Rebis, or Her- 
metic hermaphrodite. 

This symbol, probably the most important Hermetic one, can be traced 



276 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

from alchemist to alchemist as far back as to Zosimus Panopolitanus, who 
was initiated into the Egyptian mysteries either at the end of the third 
century or at the beginning of the fourth century A.D. 
According to Zosimus; 

This is the great and divine mystery — the object that is sought This is the 
AIL From it the All (proceeds) and for it the All (exists). Two natures, one 
essence; for one attracts the other and dominates it. Tins is the silver water 
(ctpyupiov), the hermaphrodite (&pasv69r|?,ou from 'dppev = virile 
and 9i]Xvq -feminine), which always eludes us, and which is always at- 
tracted to its own elements. It is the divine water that the whole world 
has neglected, whose nature is difficult to contemplate, for it is neither a 
metal, nor water ever in motion, nor a (metallic) body; it is not domi- 
nated. (Collection des Anciens Alchimistes, Paris, 1888; v. Ill, p, 146, 
from ms. 299 of the Biblioteca San Marco di Venezia, eleventh cent) 

In Zosimus this androgynous character is attributed to Mercury (the 
Greeks' hydrargyros, quicksilver). 

This symbol appears in the oldest Latin alchemical texts of the Middle 
Ages, which are nothing other than translations or immediate derivations 
from Arabic or Hebrew-Arabic texts. This symbol is designated as "Mag- 
nesia," "Diabessi stone," and with the singular title of Rebis, namely res bis, 
or "double thing." Thus, in writings that have been attributed to Rosino 
(possibly a corruption of "Zosimus"), which certainly predate the year 
1330 (since Rosino is quoted by Pietro Bono in 1330), we read; "Take the 
stone found everywhere, called Rebis . . . which means binas res, or two 
things, namely the wet and cold and the dry and warm" (Rosimi ad 
Sarratantam episcopum in Awiferae Artis quam Chemian vacant antiquissimi 
auihores, sive Turba Philosophorum, Basel, 1572, pp. 333-34), Moreover, 
the alchemist Richardus Anglicus, who was a contemporary of Pietro Bono, 
wrote; "The stone is one of a kind, just like the medicine that the Philoso- 
phers call Rebis, namely a double thing (res bina), made of body and either 
white or red spirit" (Richardus Anglicus, Correctonum in Theatrum Chemxaim, 
1602, vol II, p. 453). Lorenzo Ventura of Venice says, "That thing, out of 

which the stone is made, is called Rebis, namely composed of res bis It 

is made of two things, the sperm of the male and the menstruum of the 
woman; it is born of red and white , . ," (Laurentii Venturae Veneti, Liber 



277 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

de conficiendi Lapidis philosophicis ratione in Theat. Chem., 1602, voL II, 
p. 286j the text is also found in the collection by Gratarola, 1561). This list 
of Hermetic writers who write about Rebis could easily go on. We will 
mention also Gaston Claveus (Apologia Chrypsopeia in Theat, Chan., 1602, 
II, 46); Philalethes (Introitus apertus, Amsterdam, 1667, p, 63, ch. XXIV); 
and Ireneus Philalethes (Ennamtio methodica trium Gebri medicinanim . . . 3 
Amsterdam, 1678, p. 13), 

Beginning with the second half of the sixteenth century, we find in 
Hermetic books and manuscripts several graphic portrayals of the Rebis, 
all depicting it as an androgynous being. We need to briefly discuss these 
images in order to examine their variations and to establish the origin and 
the date of the androgyne portrayed in our Hermetic booklet. 

As far as we know, the most ancient of these representations is found in 
the second edition (1593) of the De Arte aurijera and in the third edition 
(1610) of the same. The second volume of this work contains the text 
called Rosarium philosophorum (in which it is erroneously attributed to 
Arnaldo Villanova), which is also included without pictures in Mangets 
Biblioteca Chemica Curiosa (II, 87), as the work of an anonymous author. 
This is one of the alchemical texts of the fourteenth century, and a deriva- 
tion, if not translation, of Arabic or Hebrew-Arabic texts. The tenth figure 
(Artis auriferae quam Chemiam vocant, Basel, 1593, II, 291; and 1610, II, p. 
190) represents (see our fig. 1) the Hermetic androgyne, standing above 
the crescent moon. It has a winged back, and in its right hand holds a cup, 
from which the heads and necks of three little snakes emerge; in its left 
hand it holds a coiled snake. On the bottom, on the right side we see a 
birdj and on the left side a little tree with six pairs of lunar faces and an 
extra one on the top. The seventeenth figure (p. 359 of the 2nd ed., p. 235 
of the 3rd) is merely a variation of the tenth figure; the androgyne is dressed 
instead of being naked, and instead of standing on the crescent moon it 
stands on a little mound out of which three snakes emerge; behind its legs 
lies an old lion. It has bat's wings, and on the right side we see again the 
three heads of snakes, while on the left side the coiled snake. On the right 
side, at the bottom, there is a swan or a pelican with one of its young; on 
the left side we can see the same tree mentioned before. On the top we 
read: "Perfectionis ostensio" (depiction of perfection). 



278 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

According to the authoritative opinion of Michael Maier, this figure 
"expresses the compendium of the entire art with an allegorical descrip- 
tion, in German verses, of the two-headed figure of both masculine and 
feminine appearance, which holds in its right hand three snakes and in the 
left hand a single serpent." (Symbola Aureae Mensae duodecim nationum 
auihoreMichaele Maiero, Frankfurt, 1617, VI, p. 274). See also what Abraxas 
wrote in relation to this in chapter VI. 

Three years after the last edition of the De Arte aurijerea we find in a 
famous Hermetic work a representation of the Rebis, with an important 
innovation, which also appears on our plate, namely the replacement of 
the Hermetic symbols in the hands of the Rebis with the two most impor- 
tant symbols of Masonry, namely the square and the compass. In fact, the 
second edition of the Theatrum Chanicum (Strasbourg, 1613), contains 
(IV, p, 468) the work entitled Aureliae Occultae Philosophorum Partes duo, 
which can easily be identified with Basilius Valentinus's Azoth, whose text 
is also found in Manget's work (1702) (Bibl Chan. Cur. II, 217), in which 
it is attributed to the Arab author Zadith. The Aurelia Occulta Philosophorum 
is adorned with a dozen figures, the fifth of which, reproduced here (see 
fig. 2 on page 280), represents the Rebis. 

At the top > we read Materia Prima. The whole figure is enclosed within 
an egg (the philosophical egg of Hermetic generation); in the center stands 
the Rebis, fully dressed, with its feet on the back of a winged dragon, en- 
dowed with four legs and breathing fire out of its mouth. The dragon, in 
turn, stands over a winged globe, within which we can see a cross, an 
equilateral triangle, and a square. On the higher and lower vertices of the 
cross we can read the numbers 1 and 2; along the perimeters of the tri- 
angle and of the square we read the numbers 3 and 4, respectively. 

The Rebis of Basilius Valentinus holds in its right hand a compass and 
in the left a square. The right hand corresponds to the masculine part of 
the figure (a detail that is inverted in the plate of the Italian alchemical 
text) . On the chest of the androgyne we read "Rebis." Interestingly enough, 
the letters of the word Rebis, written from right to left, are all inverted; the 
word is seen as it would appear by looking in a mirror. From the middle of 
the chest, rays lead to the astrological symbols of the seven planets, or to 
the alchemical symbols of the seven corresponding metals, all arranged in 



279 

AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

a circle beginning with the left (the feminine part) and then, descending, 
in this order: Saturn, Jupiter, Moon, Mercury 7 , Sun, Mars, Venus. Thus the 
symbol of Mercury is at top center between the two heads, one masculine, 
the other feminine. After this table comes a lengthy explanation, very 
sibylline, which we will not reproduce for the sake of brevity. 

The Rebis, in Basilius Valentinus-s variation, soon became a very popu- 
lar Hermetic symbol, thanks to the importance of this author. We do not 
know if it appeared in the German edition of Basilius Valentinus's Occulta 
Philosophic (1613). However, it is found in the French editions of Azoth 
(Paris, 1624; 2nd ed., 1659) and in the third edition of the Theatrum 
Chemicum (1659-61)* It is also reproduced in the 140th engraving found 
at the end of the third volume of Mylius's Basilica Philosophica (1620), and 
therefore^ together with the other figures found in the Basilica, in Daniel 
Stohfs Hortulus hermeticus (Frankfurt, 1627). We could easily complete 
the list of these reproductions of Rebis by Basilius Valentinus, all the way 
to the most recent ones, by Silberer, Poisson, and Wirth; however, it will 
suffice to notice how this symbol appeared only in 1613 and how it be- 
came widespread in the first half of the seventeenth century. 













£ 


-*) ^^ ^yffijw 


B^o^"'5 






(v\ 


9 /*^ ^*^ 


b£ f 






f\*\ 1 


if >tr*jj i 








fSl 


f jQ^J I 


i i V" 






Clis. 


i f /v| I / 


"5i*'77h>-s! 


\ 


/» A 
^^^^. 






-*CQG 




•»»_^* J t - r3/v. " J 










^frrT 



Figure 1, Hermetic androgyne from the Rosarium Phitosophorurrij reproduction 
from vol. ll y p. 291, o/Artis auri ferae quam Chemiam vocant, Basel, 1593. 



280 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

The androgyne portrayed on the plate of the Italian Hermetic text is 
obviously a derivation from it; only the roughness of the drawing can have 
induced Marinelli and Carbonelli to give it an earlier date. Even the saying 
at the bottom is obviously taken from the figure found in the Aurelia Occulta 
Philosophorum. 

The Rebis of Basilius Valentinus is different from all other previous 
representations of the Hermetic androgyne, especially from those of the 
Artis auriferae, due to the masonic rather than alchemical symbols that 
replace the coiled snake, the three-headed snake, and other symbols in 
other versions of it. Another innovation, without leaving the Hermetic 
field, is that of the seven planets around Rebis and of the dragon and winged 
globe beneath it. 

This dragon and globe have disappeared in the plate of our booklet, as 
has the word Rebis found on the androgyne's chest. In exchange, this Rebis 




Figure 2. The Rebis of Basilius Valentinus: reproduction from Aurelia Occulta 
Philosophorum, in Theatrum Chemicum, Strasbourg, 1613, vol. IV 



281 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

is endowed with an eye on each elbow, which is obviously the representa- 
tion of extraordinary vision. Moreover, on the two thighs, in correspon- 
dence to the masculine and feminine sides, we find two rough drawings of 
male and female genitals. Above the vulva, the artist drew a globe sur- 
mounted by a cross; above the penis, a diamond. This globe surmounted 
by the cross with a diamond at the side constitutes a symbol of antimony 
(cf. Theatre dArcani by the physician Lodovico Locatelli, Bergamo, 1644, 
p. 409); thus, in open contradiction, the prima materia sapientis (first mat- 
ter of the wise) is no longer lead, but antimony The fact that this is really 
antimony is confirmed by the first tablet of the Florentine leaden codex, 
which contains an equilateral triangle with the point up, and nine letters 
written along its sides. Above it is written; Benedicta (sic) lapidem Prima 
materia est (Blessed be the stone: it is the first matter). The nine letters 
{nine, just like the nine leaden tablets of this codex) constitute the word 
antimonio; it is odd that both Guasti and Carbonelli were unaware of this. 
Beneath the triangle is written: Ego .sum Ambasagar quo dabo a tibi vert 
secretum secretissimum noster. Written in ungrammatical Latin, this sen- 
tence means: "I am Ambasagar, the one who will reveal to you our inner- 
most secret. * 

The Florentine treatise ends by saying that the matter on which one 
needs to operate is "a cheap one, called 'Saturn,' father and son"; it then 
adds: "Look at the triangle. 1 * In this way it identifies Lead (Saturn) and 
Antimony. Marinelli's book, on page VII, says the same thing: "This matter 
is called chosen and immature mineral or your Saturn ex hoc 60 [ex hoc = 
"from this"], this is black mineral earth." After all, the identification of 
Saturn with Antimony was theoretically made at the beginning of the Liber 
Secretus of Artefius. He was the first (eleventh century) to use the word 
"antimony," which probably derives from the Arabic "athmond" or from 
the Greek "ithmi" (o"iij_i|ii) with the addition of "al." This identification 
also leads us back to Basilius Valentinus, to his times, to his chariot and to 
his regulus of antimony. By melting the mineral with black sulfur; namely 
with antimony (Sb 2 S 3> antimony trisulfide; crude antinomy), sulfur pro- 
duces sulfides with all extraneous metals, and the gold of the mineral unites 
with the metallic antimony that is now free (the regulus of antimony of the 
ancients), producing a regulus or button of antimony and gold. It is sufficient 



282 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

to warm this regulus, taking advantage of the lowest degree of fusion and 
of the volatility of Antimony, in order to isolate the gold. This fusion with 
(sulfur of) antimony was called "the king's bath," or the ''sun's bath" 
(balneitm solius regis); antimony by means of which all the metals disap- 
peared and only gold was left, was called the wolf that devours all metals. 

Guasti came to the conclusion that Ambasagar was the author of the 
little treatise, though he confessed that he was unable to trace the original 
author and work. The key of the mystery lies in the fourth plate of Marinellfs 
alchemical booklet, which we describe here. According to Marinelli, "In 
the fourth figure we can see a man scarcely clad with a fluttering cloth, 
who holds in his right hand a small globe covered with a cross. In his left 
hand he has a clock, and on each elbow there is an eye; this is an evident, 
though curious, personification of time," 

At the bottom of the plate it says: Ego sum Tubalckaimo qui dabo tibi 
verissimum secretwn secretissimum nostrum. This is the same sentence as in 
the Florentine codex, this time without grammatical errors, and with the 
replacement of Ambasagar with Tubalcain. In his right hand this figure 
carries the first symbol of antimony; in the left, a tablet that is cut above in 
a semicircle. Within it, there is a symbol that MarinelH mistook for a watch, 
and in which Carbonelli instead saw the symbol of fire A and of gold 0. 
However, this circle is inside a square, which recalls the square surmounted 
by a triangle, another symbol of the antimony that was popular in the 
seventeenth century. We may also observe that these four elements, namely 
the circle, the cross, the triangle, and the square, are also found, though in 
a different order, within the winged globe of the Rebis of Basilius Valentinus. 
We may also see in the circle inside the square a representation of the 
squaring of the circle, another symbol that was used in a Hermetic sense 
during the first half of the seventeenth century (see Michael Maier, De 
circulo phisico quadrato, hoc estauro , , ., Oppenheim, 1616). We must note 
that inside the plate there is in fact not a representation of a circle, but 
rather that of a spiral; if this is intentional, and not the result of the artist's 
lack of expertise, we need to consider yet another interpretation. The spi- 
ral is not a usual alchemical or Hermetic symbol: it represents the vortex of 
life, and if it is placed within the square, which is symbol of form, and 
under the sign A of Hermetic fire, it symbolizes the vortex of life in the 
ongoing creation, within the interplay of the two opposite aspects of form 



283 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

that are represented by the two couples on the opposite sides of the square. 

Tubalcain is the "forger of all instruments of bronze and iron" mentioned 
in the Bible (Genesis 4:19-22), and this is briefly how and why he has his 
place in the alchemical plate. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centu- 
ries the majority of scholars tried to explain all languages by referring them 
to Hebrew, which was spoken by Adam and Eve, and by the Eternal Father 
himself at the time of the Garden of Eden. Thus, Hebrew was regarded as the 
mother tongue of every language. Following this logic, Tubalcain was iden- 
tified with Vulcan, both because of the phonetic similarity and because Vulcan 
was the blacksmith of the gods. John Funger, in his Etymologicum Trilingue 
(Frankfurt, 1605— see pp. 859, 916, 917 of the 1607 ed) wrote: "Vulcan is 
obviously a derivation of Tubalcain." Twenty years later, the same identifica- 
tion is found in an even more popular text of etymology: "Tubalcain, 
Thubalkain, namely terrenus possessor, or Vulcan, master of copper, or of 
metals ..." (Christian Beckman } Manuditio ad latinam lingaam, 5th ed., 1672, 
p. 1124; 1st ed., 1626). Samuel Bohart: "Vulcan is Tubalcain, as the name 
suggests." {Optra Omnia, 1712, vol I, p. 399; 1st ed., 1646). Vossius (1662) 
and Stillingfleet (1662) came to the same conclusion as well. 

While scholars identified Vulcan and Tubalcain, alchemists and 
Hermeticists attributed to him an alchemical or Hermetic, nature. Gerhard 
Dorn, in the second half of the sixteenth century, mentioned a certain 
"Vulcanic Abraham Tubalcain, an alchemist, astrologer, and mathematician 
who brought from Egypt the various arts and sciences to the land of Canaan" 
(G. Dorn, Congeries Paracehicae in Theatrum Chcmicum, 1613, II, 592; Dorns 
writings appeared between 1567 and 1569). Michael Maier mentions how, 
understandably; "many people attribute the first practice of Chemistry" to 
Tubalcain. Olao Borricchio too, a historian and apologist of alchemy, identi- 
fies Vulcan and Tubalcain (De Ortu et de progressu Chemiae, Hafniae, 1668). 
This identification and this alchemical character of Tubalcain were popular 
throughout the eighteenth century, a trend that was probably responsible for 
the adoption of Tubalcain as a password by French and Rhineland masonic 
lodges between 1730 and 1742. This password appears mainly in the Ordre 
des Franc-MaQons trahi . . . (Geneva, 1742) and in Der Neu-aufgesteckte 
Brennende Leuchter . . . (Leipzig, 1746), at a time when the typical Hermetic 
degrees began to emerge in continental Masonry 

The Tubalcain of our plate is evidently, then, the Tubalcain who invented 



284 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

the art of working metals, and therefore the inventor of transmutation, of 
which he has good reason to claim that he can give us the secret. However, 
this identification leads us back approximately to the first half of the sev- 
enteenth century, at the peak of its popularity. Thus everything conspires 
to attribute the creation of our alchemical booklet to this date. 

As far as the Ambasagar of the other leaden codex is concerned, we 
may suppose that it signifies ambus agar, "May I be led to perform both" 
(Le,, operations, both albedo and rubedo). Or, maybe, it means ambas agam, 
namely "May 1 perform both" (ie., operations). Again, it may be that the 
nine letters are the initials of some Hermetic saying, just as in the case of 
the word vitriolum. It is almost certain that these words, Tubalcain, antimonio, 
ambasagar, vitriolum, are intentionally composed of nine letters, and the 
end of our booklet shows us why The tradition that attributes nine letters 
to the name of the "first matter" is very ancient. The Greek alchemists 
identified it in this way: 

evvea yp&ppax' iL%<o 9 xsxpaavXXa^oc, eipl, vosi pe. 
Ai xpeT^ pi£v rap coxa i 5i&o Yp&ppax' ^xouaiv ^Kaairj, 
Ai A,oi7Hxi 5e xa A,oi7ta. mi eiaiv atJKova xa nevxe. 
Otok apur]xoq eari xf\q Trap 1 epoi oo^ixiq 

(1 have nine letters, am four-syllabled, and you will know me, because 
the first three [syllables] are each of two letters, and the last of the rest, and 
there are five consonants in all. You will be initiated into the wisdom that 
1 possess.) 

The key to this riddle is the word ap-ce-vt— kov = arsenic, composed 
of nine letters, four syllables, four vowels, and five consonants. Arsenic 
was the ancient name of orpiment (from aim pigmentum), which is an 
arsenic sulfide. This was regarded as a second mercury, due to the identity 
of its behavior. It is easy to see how ambasagar is composed of the same 
number of letters, vowels, and consonants as ar-se-ni-kon. With some varia- 
tions, they conform to the same law of composition of the words Tubalcain, 
vitriolum, antimony, and other words of lesser importance in the hermetic 
literature, such as An-ne-Xwiq = terra vinealis, which the Hermeticists 
of the seventeenth century regarded as the true solution of the above-men- 
tioned riddle. Even in the alchemical manuscripts we find traces of this 



263 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

tradition; an example can be found in a representation of Gerber in an 
ancient manuscript, reported by Carbonelli (op. ciL, p. 57), which has at 
the bottom the word Riovrabet, 




The fifth plate of the alchemical booklet contains only these words; 
"Ecnedictam lapidem LAPIS N05TER," And further on, "Benedictus qui venit 
in nomine domini," Then the text begins ? divided into seven short chapters 
that we are going to reproduce here followed by a few explanatory notes. 
The first little chapter is a prologue to the next five, all of which are devoted 
to the various operations. The last chapter is the epilogue, unless it has been 
added by someone else. The first short chapter fills the plates VI— XII of the 
booklet. Here is the text: 

The Great Work can be performed either according to the humid or the 
dry way. 12B In the first way one employs pure dew, hail, orfior coclis} 29 

In the second way one employs matter that has been prepared by na- 
ture, for the imperfect metallic work 130 : 

This matter is called elect and immature mineral, or "your Saturn." 
This 60 is black mineral earth 131 that is still green and heavy, and it is 



128. Even today, in chemistry, analysis can be through either a dry way or a humid way. 
In regard to both ways according to Hermeticism, see the essay by Abraxas in chapter II, 
entitled "Three Ways/' 

1 29. The. text reads cc fior codis," but this is obviously a misspelling of "fior cadi." Flos 
coell \flos is the Latin term, jior the later Italian term] is in fact an alchemical term 
designating some kind of manna. Hermetically speaking, "fior coeli" (i.e,, "flower of 
heaven") is the heavenly grace that descends on a mystic like dew flowing from heaven 
to nourish the parched land, in mystics one does detect something humid or dewy, 
which is not very sympathetic to the followers of the dry and regal way. 

130. According lo alchemists, metals are formed in the bowels of the earth; nature always 
tends toward perfection, but sometimes the metallic work is imperfect. Thus, the 
alchemist must take this imperfect metal and transform it. The same happens and must 
be done in Hermeticism with our Saturn. 

131. G.Johnson's dictionary (cf. Manget, Bibl Chem. Cur., 1702) says: "Antimony is 
called the Dregs of Lead, Our Mercury, Marcasite, Mined Lead, Dead Lead, Black Earth." 
It is still green because it is immature; it is coarse because it has not yet been purified; it 
is heavy because it is still subject to the earthly law of gravity. 



286 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

called mafesia 132 or saturnine marcasite. 133 If that matter had cooked longer 
in the bowels of the earth, and if it had not been mixed by accident with 
various impurities, it would have been the sacred sun and moon: for Sat- 
urn is the first principle of the metals, which is therefore called leprous 
Gold 0, 134 

This gold must be purified from this leprosy and from other drosses in 
the easiest and quickest way But in order for Gold to be utilized, it first 
needs to be reduced to seed, 135 that the first matter may grow as much as is 
proper to this earth. Out of it we need to draw the true mercury or the 



132. This is a misspelling of "Magnesia." Johnson's dictionary reads: "Magnesia 
communiter est marcasita," (Mangel, I, 250) 

133. Today an iron sulfide that differs from the ordinary pyrite for the way in which it 
becomes crystallized is called marcasite (white pyrite). Once this word designated 
various minerals, which contained sulfides of other metals. According to G. Johnson, 
"Marcasite is an immature metallic matter, of many species ..." In an anonymous letter 
found in the third edition of TheaUimi Chanicum (VI, 475) we read: "Besides vulgar lead 
there is another lead in which philosophers are interested, namely Magnesia. Magnesia is 
black earth with white eyes. Such black earth is leaden Marcasite, namely Antimony, 
Antimony is in fact the Lead mentioned by philosophers; from it is extracted the 
vegetable quicksilver of a red color, which possesses the secret of all secrets." 

134. Leprosy corrodes the limbs and leads to death. 

135. In other words, it must acquire the faculty to multiply According to Alexandrian 
alchemists, the procedure for obtaining gold consisted in a diplosis or duplication. For 
practical purposes, all that is required to alter the malleability of gold is a small quantity 
of antimony vapors emanating from a basin filled with molten antimony, since antimony 
mixes with gold very easily. Considering the imperfect methods of separation, it may 
have looked as if the quantity of gold had increased. Analogically speaking, in Hermeti- 
cism, Gold is multiplied by bathing it in our antimony. 

According to the Cosmopolite (Novum Lumen Chemicum, X, 1604): "Gold may 
produce fruit and seeds, in which it multiplies with the activity of the wise creator, who 
knows how to lead nature forward . , . but in order for this to happen, if the spirit does 
not appear in the frozen metallic body, it is first necessary to melt the body and to allow 
its pores to open, so that nature may operate. There are two types of solutions, a natural 
one and a violent one (which includes all others). . . . The natural one consists in 
allowing the body's pores to open in our water, so that the digested seed may be ema- 
nated and imposed to its matrix. Our water is heavenly water that does not wet the 
hands; it is rainwater (i.e., descending from heaven) and not ordinary water. The body is 
the Gold that produces seed." 

On this matter see what Luce wrote in chapter I, and what Abraxas wrote in chapters 
111 and IV 



287 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

clear water found in the royal bath. 136 This matter can be found in many 
places where lead and tin are mined, though it is more perfect in one place 
than in another. 

In Bohemia, near Prague, there is a good mine where lead is found, re- 
sembling butter but black and of an acidic spirit. Many people have found 
such matter in the well-preserved receptacle of Saturn, which is virgin lead 
called Saturno pater, et Saturnofilii (Saturn father and Saturn son). 

The first operation is described in the plates XIII-XVII of the booklet. At the 
top of plate XIII it is written: *Si yolunt procedere fiat totum in nomine domini. 
Hop, Prima." This means: "If they want to proceed, let everything be done in 
the name of the Lord." Here is the text: 

FIRST OPERATION 

R. e — 137 The center of this matter^60 operates as if it were, in the 
bowels of the earth. Having pulverized its accuracy in a very subtle way, 138 



136. Chemically speaking, the mineral needs to be transformed into water, or to be 
liquefied. This is done with the bath of the King or of the Sun, namely by melting the 
mineral together with black sulfur (antimony sulfide). The experience taught how the 
chemical reaction was made easier, if not possible, by the solution or fusion. 

Hermetically speaking, see what Abraxas wrote in chapter III concerning the "first 
extraction of Mercury from the Mine. 11 True Mercury is our Water, clear or transparent 
Water (in Greek hydrargyros or silver- water). See again the Cosmopolite's passage 
previously quoted. In this solution lies the solution of the problem. One of the sayings 
taken from John Braccesco's two dialogues (Dealchemia dialogi duo), which was 
translated from Italian and placed in the foreword of the Latin edition (Lyon, 1548), 
reads: "From the solution of vitriol a dual vapor (fumus) is produced, and these two 
fumes are called by philosophers "Sulfur" and "Mercury." 

137. R. c = abbreviation for recipe, "take." One needs to refer to or go in the center (heart) 
of our Saturn or Antimony, as if dwelling within ones own bowels (the interiors 

1 "interior"] of Basilius Valentinus). The symbol of this Earth .is formed by the symbol of 
the earth 6, namely by the globe surmounted by a cross (the cross symbolizes the 
consecration of the equilibrium and neutrality that have been previously attained by 
placing oneself in the center and separating oneself from the periphery) and by the 
symbol 0, which is possibly formed by the overlapping of the symbols A and V, reiterat- 
ing the same concept in a certain sense. 

138. This is the transformation and separation of the subtle from the gross, mentioned in 
the "Emerald Tablet." It is the shift to the /[iridic state and body mentioned by Abraxas. 



288 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

and having passed it through a very tight silk sieve, 139 put it in ft and 
subject it to A , 140 After placing it on a very strong flame, distill it in an 
open container; this operation is called "extraction of the elements," 141 
The retort, in order to be able to endure on the fire, must be luted at the 
bottom 142 and the fire must last sixteen hours. In the beginning it must be 
a light fire fed with coals, until the spirit or Mercury is produced. 143 At the 
end, the fire must be very strong, and fed with wood, so that ^ may be 
attached in the retort. 144 Keep the spirit well closed in the o = o 145 and 
scrape the sulfur with all diligence through the second work. 

The chapter ends with the illustration of a star with seven points. In corre- 
spondence to each point we see the symbols of the seven planets in the same 
order and arrangement found in the Rebis of Basilius Valentinus. Each tip of 
the star is split into two parts, one clear, the other dark. Inside the star there 
is a circle in which we can see an infant with a crowned head. Inside the 
circle there is a saying; Qui rex natus a Philosophis est Lapis Noster (This king 
born from the philosophers is our stone). 146 



139. This very tight sieve apparently corresponds to the pores of our metallic body 
mentioned by the Cosmopolite in the passage we have quoted before. These pores must 
open up in order to melt down the body. A few of us, including myself, have even had a 
visual perception of this sieve on numerous occasions. Some may be inclined to think of 
a connection between the sieve of the Eleusinian Mysteries and this chymica vannus; but 
as suggestive as this comparison may be i 1 think it Is nevertheless groundless, 

140. Place it sideways and ignite it. This is the second regimen, or ignificaiion, men- 
tioned by Abraxas in chapter VI. 

141. Mercury £ clear water and the inner Fire or £. 

142. The Hermetic seal that isolates the inside of the container from the outside. 

143. At first the fire must be slow and gentle (see the essay by Abraxas in chapter III) 
because spirit or Mercury first needs to be extracted. 

144. In the second phase the fire must be very strong, so that sulfur £ may touch and 
stick to the retort 

145. It is necessary to keep the spirit from escaping out of the earthen tube. 

146. This is the infans secundae generationis of the Cosmopolite; it is the regains (little 
king) of the antimony of Basilius (little king) Valentinus. And it is the divine child 
mentioned by Luce in chapter II. 



289 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

Plate XVIII bears the inscription: Infantem natum dtbcs alimentare usque ad 
aetatan perfectam; namely, "The infant who is now born must be fed until he 
reaches the perfect age," What follows is the operation according to plates 
XVIII-XX-XXL 

SECOND OPERATION 

Take your ^ and purify it by sublimating it three times; every time put 
back that which is at the bottom together with what has come up, R. e the 
spirit that is £; together with the latter put ten grains of this sulfur 147 Put 
it at the lowest point and then for forty days 146 in an alembic with a blind 
hat. After forty days take it out; in place of the hat put on the other ros- 
trum; distill everything and remove the dregs at the bottom. Make sure 
that when distilling, the container does not become glued and leaky in the 
alembic. Having done that, place it in a well-sealed glass and hide it in a 
cool place, so that the spirits may not come out and roam around. 

The chapter ends with the following line: Hie est donus (sic) del optimum 
(this is the best gift of God). Plates XXII, XX1I1, and XXIV contain the: 

THIRD OPERATION 

R. e as much weight of your $ according to the quantity of your $ in a 
flask or vial over which you will sink ten times more than your $. i49 Then 
put on top of it another vial, placing it on sand; use a light fire until the 
sulfur melts down. 150 Make sure that the vial in which you put the matter 
has a long neck, while the other vial has a short neck; moreover, make sure 
that the short neck can fit in the long one, so that the spirits may not 



147. In regard to this mixture of Mercury and Sulfur, see what Abraxas wrote in chapter VI. 

148. In regard to the number forty in Alchemy and in esotericism, see A. Reghini's 
article: "La quaresima iniziatica" in Ignis, December 1925. The 74th proposition found in 
the 1 548 edition of the De AJchama Dialagi duo claims that the alchemical nigredo lasts 
for forty days. 

149. The amount of the doses to be employed was paramount. On this matter^ see the 
essay by Abraxas in chapter 111. 

150. A light fire is sufficient to attain the fusion of Sulfur, without inducing the evapora- 
tion and the boiling of Mercury or the explosion of the flask. 



290 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

escape while they are circulating inside. This solution, well closed, serves 
for the next work. 

At the bottom of the plates we read: Item, in renim moltitudine ars nostra non 
consistit; namely; u Our art does not consist in the multitude of things." 
Plates XXV and XXVI contain the: 

FOURTH OPERATION 

R. e this solution of sulfur and place it in the alembic as in the second 
operation, with its lid in the sand. At first use a light fire, so that the spirit 
may ascend. This spirit is called "virginal milk" for its purity 151 Then turn 
up the heat so that the ^ will adhere to the lid: this is our perfect sulfur, 
which you need to gather carefully. After putting a lid on the alembic, keep 
it as well as the spirit, or $. 

At the bottom we read the following saying: "Sifixum solvasjaciasque volare 
solvitum, et solutum ridas, faciat te vlvere Hetum™ 2 
Plates XXV1I-XXX contain the: 

FIFTH OPERATION 

R. e your perfect sulfur, on which you will sink ten parts of the Mer- 
cury 153 you have prepared. Place it in an egg of t> O. 1 " 4 Having sealed it 
with the seal of Hermes, place it over a small stove; the heat should not be 



151. Virgin's milk. See the essay by Abraxas, chapter VI. The philosophical child, the 
little king, needs to be fed with "virgin's milk." Lapis, ut injans, lacte nutricndum est 
virginali (the stone, like a child, should be nursed with virgins milk), says Michael Maier 
(Simhola Aureae mensae, 1617), Tt is the milk of the virgin Mary in the Rosicrucian 
allegory. See also the. "milky ocean" mentioned by Luce in chapter I. 

152. Or, more correctly, Sifixum solvas f faciasque volare solutum, et solutum deddas, facit te 
vivere fotum; "If you will melt down that which is fixed, and will cause the solution to 
disappear, and if you will return the solution to its fixed state, this will cause you to live 
happily." This is a variation of the saying; 

Sifixum solvas, faciasque volare solutum, 
Et volucrem fl gas, facit te vivere letum. 

Chemically speaking, the operation is divided into three phases: fusion, volatiliza- 
tion, and reduction. 

153. This time Sulfur is perfect and Mercury is prepared. In Greek, the word Bsiov 
means both "divine" and "sulfur." 

154. An ostrich's egg hermetically sealed. 



291 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

greater than the temperature of a feverish person. Then the various mate- 
rials will disintegrate. 

At the bottom of Plate XXVIII, at the lower-right corner, we can see a crow 
carrying in its beak some sort of tablet on which is written nigro nigrium, 
which more correctly and completely should read instead nigrum nigri 
nigrius (the black blacker than black). This alludes symbolically to the first 
phase of the operation, namely to the stone in black. The test continues on 
Plate XXVIII and says: 

After it disintegrates it will turn white. 

In this context we see a figure that represents a chariot being drawn above 
the clouds by two doves. In the chariot there is a seated woman with a half- 
moon over her head and with a radiating aura behind her head. She holds in 
her left hand a small flowering branch, the "tree of Diana.' 1155 After this 

figure, the text continues: 

This is our Diana, whom you can cause to stop here, if you wish, through 
the work in white. 156 If you wish to go further, keep feeding the fire until 
the upper part turns red like the color of blood, 157 



155. The tree of Diana is one of the so-called "metallic trees." The first mention of it is 
found in Clavis philosophorum by Eck de Sulzbach, at the end of the fifteenth century. See 
the Theatrum Chemicum, IV It is formed by pouring a concentrated solution of Silver 
nitrate over Mercury; or by pouring water over a concentrated solution of Silver nitrate, 
making sure that they do not mix, and then dipping a silver plate all the way to the 
bottom. Hermetically speaking, silver, moon, doves, and the tree of Diana are all symbols 
of the Work ad album (in white). 

156. Diana, namely the moon, the shiny one, shining with a reflected light, that is, silver. 
Etymologically, argentum (Silver) means "shiny white" (hence Arjuna, Argus, Argo- 
nauts). The two doves (binae columbae; two is the symbol of duality passivity, feminin- 
ity) are referred to her because of their color; they replace the crow, just as forty days 
after the Flood, the crow left first, followed by the dove. 

157. Namely the Work in Red. In regard to the Work in White and in Black, see the essay 
by Abraxas in chapter VI. To the notes about symbolism found there, we can add that the 
zodiac symbol of the Ram T, a masculine sign, at the time of Zosimus was also the sign 
of Sulfur. It follows that when through the ignification or rubedo Sulfur ^ = T is 
immersed in tf passive and feminine Mercury, transforming it into $ active and creative 
Mercury; this $ symbolically reunites sulfur $ and Mercury £.To complete the symbol- 
ism of the crow and the doves, corresponding to the color black (Saturn, Lead) and 
white (Moon, Silver), we will say that red corresponds to the crimson Phoenix (Latin: 
Phoenix puniceus = "red"; puniceus is derived etymologically from the Greek phoiniheios) 
that revives amid flames. 



292 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

At the bottom of the plate we see a man with a crowned head. He holds in his 
right hand some kind of scepter and in the left hand an elliptical crown with 
the symbols of the seven planets in the following order: Moon, Jupiter, Saturn, 
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Sun. In this way Mercury is always in the middle, as in 
the Rebis of Basilius Valentinus, but this time on the bottom. 

Plate XXXI contains on the upper left the image of a cup with its lid held by 
an arm protruding out of a cloud. It is possibly an image of the Grail. Next to it 
we read: "Hie est lapis noster: jortuna medius granus huius est cur a omnium 
morbonim incurabilium; that is 5 "This is our stone, half of which suffices to heal 
all incurable diseases." The following text is written on this plate and the next: 

R. e an ounce of purged by means of 60. Liquefy it, test it, and when 
it reaches boiling point put on it a drachme of your medicine and you will 
immediately see © coming to a halt and no longer running. What remains 
is a reddish stone that easily breaks: and this is the philosophers' stone. 

What follows is Plate XXXIII, containing an allegorical figure. High above, a 
crowned human figure holds in both hands a crown; a bit lower, three 
crowns float in the air. Farther down we find human portrayals of Moon, 
Mercury, and Saturn, which are characterized by their alchemical symbols. 
These figures stretch their hands toward the three crowns. On the right we 
can see Jupiter, Mars, and Venus (the latter already crowned). On the upper 
right is the sun: the head of the central figure is surrounded by a nimbus of 
rays. Here too, as in the figure of the Hermetic charioteer and in the figure of 
Diana, the entire scene does not take place on earth, but above the clouds. 

At the bottom we see the saying: Et hoc est donus Dei qui omnia imperfecta 
metalia in aurum aurum comutat — that is, "This is God's gift that transforms 
into (pure) gold all the imperfect metals." In regard to the Hermetic mean- 
ing of the metate, see what Luce says in chapters 1 and IL Plates XXXIV and 
XXXV contain this admonition: 

Make sure that in the beginning the wick is of no more than four or five 
threads until it becomes black, and that is called putrefaction. After seven 
threads, it becomes white, which is the philosophers' white daughter. Af- 
ter nine threads it becomes red. The oil of the lamp must be very pure. In 
the middle of the stove place a copper plate, and on it put the ashes of 
mistletoe from an oak, from which the salt should be extracted; in them 
put the philosophical egg. The lamp must not be closer than four fingers 
from the plate — i.e., from its flame. Continue in this fashion until the 
Finis (end). L. D. (meaning "Laus Deo" [Praise God]) 
Nonplus ultra (No further) 



293 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

What follows is the last plate that contains the key of the cryptic alphabet in 
which the booklet is written, preceded by the saying: Hie est via veritatis, 
"This is the way of truth/ 

Even in this detail the two leaden codices resemble each other: the 
Florentine codex too is written in code, and it contains at page 18 the key of 
the characters preceded by the title: Hie est via veritatis. 




The fact that the two leaden codices are written in code is not insignifi- 
cant. Obviously the owner of the alchemical book must have held it in 
great regard, and wanted to make sure that, if it fell into other people's 
hands, its meaning would be obscure. The great similarity between the 
two codices suggest that one is a derivation from the other, or both derived 
from one secret ritual that was their common source. The presence in the 
alchemical book of Tubalcain and the Rebis of Basilius Valentinus shows 
that it was later than 1615, and probably belongs to the period 1615-1650, 
during the golden age of Hermeticism and of the Rosicrucians, after the 
Cosmopolite and before Philalethes. During this period we know that there 
were secret Hermetic organizations. Hermeticism penetrated even British 
Masonry at that time; its influence in the ancient Masonic order can be 
traced for about two centuries. Are we then looking at the ritual of one of 
these secret organizations? Or should we assign to this codex a meaning 
and a value that is exclusively alchemical? Are the coarseness of the draw- 
ing and the errors of orthography and grammar in Latin and in Italian to 
be attributed only to the author of the booklet, or are they the proof of the 
low cultural level of the booklet's owner? Are these deficiencies enough to 
exclude the symbolical, Hermetic value of the booklet and to guarantee 
that we should not see in it anything else than the exposition of the norms 
of a purely chemical procedure for the extraction of gold? 

Modern scholars of alchemy presuppose that in every alchemical writ- 
ing we are always dealing with chemical operations, despite the explicit 
declarations to the contrary of so many authors, such as the Cosmopolite 
and Philalethes. However, we should also be careful not to fall in the oppo- 
site error, by giving a symbolical value to something totally devoid of it. By 
following the text of the alchemical booklet we have tried, within the 
limits of our competence and of the available space, to shed light on its 



294 
AN ITALIAN ALCHEMICAL TEXT ON LEAD TABLETS 

literal-alchemical and spiritual-Hermetic meaning. In doing so we have 
referred to what has been outlined in excellent fashion by Abraxas and by 
Luce. We do not want to claim that the true symbolical meaning can be 
attributed to it only in virtue of the methodical correspondence that was 
traditionally established by Hermeticists between the phases of chemical 
transformation and the phases of inner transformation; but neither do we 
want to claim that the meaning that writer of the booklet had in mind was 
just of inner transformation and that he only strove to hide it, more 
philosophico (in philosophic fashion), under the appearance of chemical 
transformation. It may well be, after all, that for the writer the two trans- 
formations were both possible and that he dealt with them at the same 
time; and that the Hermetic symbolism was the simple and natural conse- 
quence of an analogy of procedure. The expert reader will judge for him- 
self if it is possible to give an answer to these questions, and what answer 
is most plausible. 



Luce 

Opus Magicum: 

Chains 



Th 



he purpose of magical chains is to determine a collective fluid force 
that is potentially greater than the one that is available to each of the links 
separately, and which may be used by every individual participant. 

A chain is formed through "syntony" of the elements that compose it, 
when there is either identity or correspondence, according to the law of 
numbers, of the inner attitude or of the ritual practiced by several people. 
Members of these chains could operate either together or in different loca- 
tions, and even be unaware each other, as long as the rules of timing and 
rituals are rigorously observed. A chain may be formed intentionally and 
ceremonially when one or more people establish its purpose and adequately 
determine its ritual, according to traditional norms. However, the sponta- 
neous forming of a chain is also possible, just as it is possible for a person 
to become part of it without realizing i t. ] 5S In these cases the condi tion is one 
of correspondence of subtle vibrations, which by itself is able to establish a 
relationship, not withstanding temporal and spatial distances. 

The collective force of the chain constitutes a real entity at the service 
of those wiio have created it; it is a coagulation of astral light that can be 
projected into a psychic "figure 51 and that is strictly connected to the sym- 
bols and formulas that have helped to shape it in a certain school, commu- 
nity, or tradition. Thus it may happen that merely making some traditional 
gestures, or uttering names or invocations in the right circumstances, even 
by an outsider, may provoke phenomena of illumination „ apparitions, and 
realizations that are apparently inexplicable. 

In a magical chain that has been consciously created and is actively 



158. A case may arise in which a person operates with another person belonging to a 
chain, or follows its rituals without, however, participating in it, even though various 
circumstances may cause him to believe otherwise. The reason for such "isolations" is 
almost always determined by a higher and inviolable will that determines the state of 
things in conformity with a state of lightness — or of dignity — all the while offering the 
means for a later elevation. 



297 
OPUS MAGICUM: CHAINS 

operative, the collective fluid force is the £ (or the $) in regard to the of 
a Leader. The hierarchical order of its components is the natural order of 
the spiritual plane: the worthiest at the top, the merely strongest at the 
bottom. Here the "dignity" could be congenital in the person, or acquired, 
or bestowed through consecration or investiture. 

The hierarchical recognition is a conscious act in the individual that de- 
termines spiritually worthy relationships, independently of common opin- 
ion; he who is capable of this immediately recognizes those who are supe- 
rior to him and subjects himself to them; he also recognizes himself as supe- 
rior to others and has authority over them. Whenever such evaluations are 
contaminated by considerations of an inferior order, preventing this self- 
acknowledgment, the hierarchical order is formally established by the Leader 

The Head may pass on his own dignity, and his own powers with it; he 
may even lose it or change his status in it as soon as somebody else, who is 
or becomes greater than he, enters to participate in the chain. Then again: 
the Head of a chain and his members are effectively related to the highest 
spiritual hierarchy 

The entity of a chain that perpetuates itself for generations, through 
the members of a community or initiatic school, sums up in itself a tradi- 
tion. The light and power of this tradition are not dissolved by any inter- 
ruption that may occur in the transmission on the physical plane, but they 
enter into a virtual state; thus, they may be recalled at any time and in any 
place by those who, possessing the right intention, resume the operation 
according to the rituals > by using the signs and symbols of this tradition. 

When several people operate together, the chain is formed if: 

— three people form a triangle, with the vertex (occupied by the 
highest of the three) facing eastward, as they all look in that 
direction; 

— more people form a circle, the center of which is occupied by the 
highest member, or, if the number is sufficient, by him and two 
other people who are either chosen or designated beforehand, as 
they face eastward. 

The total number of participants will invariably be odd; the number of 
those who form the circle surrounding the main operators will always be even. 



298 
OPUS MAGICUM: CHAINS 

There are several ways to form a circle, applied in a particular manner 
according to the goal and manner of the different operations, and specific 
to each of them. I will mention some of them here. 

If there are women involved, they must be strictly alternated with men. 

Those who form the chain must do the following: 

— all join hands 

or else avoid any contact with their neighbors; 

— all face inside the circle 

or all face outward 

or alternate, one facing inward, one outward; 

— remain motionless through the entire operation 

or move in a circle 
either in clockwise 
or counterclockwise fashion; 

— change the speed, or remain still and then start up again as the 
operator instructs. 

The double circle is formed in an analogous fashion. Besides what has 
been said: 

— the outer circle may be formed by males, the inner by females, or 
vice versa; 

— the external circle faces outward, the inner circle inward, or vice 
versa; 

— the members of one circle are either in front of the members of the 
other circle, in relation to the center, or not; 

— the movement of the circles is either 

identical 

or going in opposite directions. 

The triple circle is formed in a similar manner, with other variations, 
both in order and in the directions. 

The vibration of the chain in its members is triple: in the physical, astral, 
and spiritual planes, generating particular actions and reactions, causes, 
means 5 effects, practices, and operations in each "plane" or "world," The 



299 
OPUS MAG1CUM: CHAINS 

syntony of vibrations is achieved when all the members of the chain fol- 
low an identical regimen, however it may be defined ritually, as well as 
identical practices, and when they fix the same symbol in their own inner 
light. This may consist in pronouncing internally and externally (with one's 
voice, will, and spirit) the ritual formulas, sometimes even following a 
certain rhythm or singing hymns suitable for the purposes of particular 
operations. All members must try to evoke in themselves the state of fluid 
vibration, which is then exalted and potentized through "sympathy.'* 

The purpose of the chains that are ceremonially convened may be a 
higher illumination of all the participants, or of one of them, or else a 
practical and contingent realization; or the initiation of a neophyte, on whom 
the head of the chain bestows states of consciousness through "induction" 
of the light and the power of the entire chain; or for other reasons. 

In order to achieve the ignification of the astral light (see the essay by 
Abraxas, chapter VI), namely the transformation of £ into $, some chains 
use forms of violence (e.g., dervishes, flagellants), while others employ 
orgiastic forms, or a combination of both. 159 The procedures are analogous 
to the ones that are practiced by the single individual 



159. See, for instance, the employment of women and sacrificial rapes in the chakras 
(chains) that practice the secret cult of Kali. In Saudi Arabia, in order to reach a certain 
degree of exaltation and supreme fixation, at the center of chains that are prepared with a 
crescendo of progressive rhythms and movements of the head and torso, the fluidic 
vertigo is taken on and dominated by an action of the Head of the chain, who> in a state 
of absolute lucidity, pierces his body with a sword. Since he is in a state of magical 
equilibrium, it leaves him unscathed, and shows no signs of entry wounds or blood. 
(Note by UR) 



Leo 

The Attitude Toward 
Initiatic Teachin 



T 



he following considerations are addressed to those who not only have 
read what I have explained so far, but who, when confronted with the 
transmission of teachings, also have/elt and willed. 

In the order of esoteric knowledge, one cannot remain passive before 
what is received, which is given not for information's sake, but in order to 
lead others to similar inner achievements. Whatever is communicated, if it 
is received with the right spiritual attitude, has the power to transform one's 
essence. Those who overcome an obstacle in this order of things do not do it 
for their own sake alone; there is an occult bond among human beings that 
allows others to partake in the spiritual achievements of an individual, even 
if such a person remains aloof, invisible, and silent. But when the path being 
followed is expressed through thoughts, this occult and natural process of 
participation is brought into the light of knowledge and free individuality. 
Thus it is necessary to learn to receive it in the right way 

One should not react and grasp what is being communicated only with 
the mind (this is the first obstacle that meets esoteric teachings, and which 
can arrest and neutralize them all); rather, one*s thoughts must generate 
living images, and these in turn must be felt What I mean is that the state 
that 1 have described must be imagined as taking shape in us — almost as if 
we "invented" it — and at the same time we must possess and maintain a 
corresponding state of feeling in our hearts. 

I am not talking about some definite feeling, as usually occurs in ordi- 
nary life, but about the pure and simple attitude of feeling, of listening 
with the ear of the heart in inner calmness; this is very different from the 
emotional, instinctive, and immediate reactions that make people rejoice 
or suffer as they identify with them and get lost in them. This is a special 
attitude that has to be practiced. As a starting point, try to remember and 



301 
THE ATTITUDE TOWARD INTTIATIC TEACHING 

to reproduce through the imagination a certain emotion experienced in 
given circumstances. Then, try to abstract either these circumstances and 
the object that occasioned it, or else its definite coloring of pleasure or 
pain. You will find that something remains — an intense and yet calm emo- 
tional state, collected almost as a "warmth" within the heart. This exercise 
is very important and is not as difficult to practice as it may first seem. 

This purified manner of feeling preserves one's freedom before the con- 
tent of the experience, and at the same time shifts its content from the 
brain to the more subtle centers. There, the teaching is internalized and 
appropriated, reemerging in a form similar to the act of remanbering. lt0 
The message no longer seems to come from the outside, but seems to arise 
from inside us, shedding light on and giving value to our inner experi- 
ences, the significance of which had eluded us up to that point. 

Moreover, it is necessary to have at the same time, and in a distinct 
fashion, a willful attitude within our interiority. But even the will must 
have a special meaning; it must be independent from every stimulus and 
eveiy goal. We may compare it to that which one feels while preparing to 
break a rigid object, the muscular tension preceding the movement itself. 
Here, too, we may utilize the imagination as in the case of feeling, and 
abstract from the meaning of an act of will that is recalled either the deter- 
mining cause that awakened it or else the direction toward which it was 
addressed. It will also be possible to utilize the memory of the state of 
energy preceding the discharge in which it was transformed into action 
and material movement. 

The will, when caught in this condition, is experienced as a state that 
fills the arms and the lower half oj one's body with life. Through the corre- 
sponding attitude, the content of a teaching is received by other subtle 
centers of our being. The inner experience will be very different from that 
which 1 characterized earlier as a "remembering." Here it will instead ap- 
pear as if a strong current from another source of energy erupted and 
coupled itself with our own, multiplying it. 

Receiving as thinking needs to be simultaneously integrated with 



160. This experience of "remembering" as the characteristic of a new type of emergence 
of knowledge Ls capable of introducing one to the deep and experiential meaning of the. 
Platonic doctrine of truth as anamnesis, namely as "recollecting." Moreover, the Greek 
term for "truth," aletheia, may be translated as "destruction of forge tfulness.* 



302 
THE ATTITUDE TOWARD IN1TIATIC TEACHING 

receiving as feeling and with receiving as willing, activating centers that in 
ordinary conditions remain dormant. These are distinct states, although 
simultaneous. 

This may appear difficult. In reality many people can, through practice, 
attain the state in which one perceives, feels, and wills in three different 
zones of one's own being; this marks the first emancipation from the laws 
of the physical world, and a first realization of our unity with the subtle 
body in the w r aking state. 

All this represents a process of inner development that, once attained, 
leads to both a complete revision of the attitude toward life and the expe- 
rience of the sensible world in general. Other evidences arise, other sys- 
tems of reference. A new discipline in one's life and behavior sets itself up 
on an entirely new basis; moreover, one's thought begins to form itself, in 
consequence, as an orientation of knowledge, which takes on the value of 
a doctrine. 

The process is in inverse to that of ordinary life, in which theory pre- 
cedes practice and experience. Here we first find an inner action, the free 
initiative that leads to things that are not thought, supposed, or believed, 
but rather experienced; only at a second stage does one formulate a doc- 
trine that is justified and ordered only on the basis of these effective and 
inner experiences. Esotericism does not require any act of faith. Rather, it 
requires goodwill and a spirit free of a priori assumptions and prejudices — 
and yet, this is precisely where the difficulty lies. It is useless to discuss 
this or that, since the basis of a discussion cannot be the same; likewise, in 
this field it is useless to create conviction solely through discursive argu- 
ment. Rather, we should try to accept and to operate, and to observe with 
objectivity whatever ensues from the acceptance and from the action within 
the inner domains of our being. Thus one's criteria and knowledge wall be 
a result and not a starting point. 

It will be useful, further on, to see what each one may conclude in regard 
to esoteric doctrine on the basis of the lines of experiment that I have de- 
scribed so far. This, however, should not be understood as an a priori intel- 
lectual view, but rather as an a posteriori organization of knowledge. 

In this domain, we must avoid ending up in rigid formulas. It is neces- 
sary to leave a certain margin of indeterminacy so that the spirit may flow 



303 
THE ATTITUDE TOWARD INIT1ATIC TEACHING 

and develop a somewhat creative and synthesizing initiative, bringing into 
action faculties that are left inactive when comprehension is merely through 
logical schemata. Words must contain something more than what they 
habitually express, and the attention of the reader or listener must be re- 
fined so as to "fix" not only the sense, but also what the sense gradually 
calls forth as a secret resonance in ourselves. That which is tidily encapsu- 
lated in a logical formula is dead for the life of the spirit- 



Ea 



Freedom, Precognition, and 
the Relativity of Time 



Vir sapiens dominabitur astris. 
(The wise man -will dominate the stars.) 



i 



s time an intrinsic characteristic of things, and a law of existence from 
which there is no reprieve? Or is it simply something accidental that com- 
pels man to become aware of things and events? And, in the latter case, 
should we imagine them to be free in themselves from the linear and con- 
secutive law of time? 

This problem is not posed here from a philosophical point of view, nor 
from the perspective of contemporary physics, but rather as it is imposed 
by a certain class of little-observed and sporadic (though not any less real) 
phenomena. I am referring to cases of precognition. 

These phenomena can be divided in three categories: 

1. First of all, there are more or less obscure sensations about imminent 
and totally unexpected events. These sensations often have a premonitory 
character. A friend of mine once decided to travel to a northern Italian 
town on a certain date. It just so happened that he was seized by the irre- 
sistible and inexplicable impulse to leave a day earlier. As he obeyed that 
impulse, during the trip he experienced a strong sense of anguish that 
disappeared only once a certain town was left behind. The following day, 
the train that he was originally supposed to take crashed in proximity to that 
town, and many people died or were injured. 

2, Second, there are predictions. Some people, who are so-called "lucid," 
correctly declare that some very unlikely or accidental events are about to 
happen. An example of this is the absolutely exact prediction of what per- 
son, in a crowd, is going to occupy a given seat in a theater. Mere statistical 
calculations, when rigorously applied to similar predictions, have been 



305 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

unable to explain this phenomenon, on which weighs an irreducible fac- 
tor of improbability. 

3, Third, there are authentic cases of precognition. This is the case of the 
same event seen twice, in the present and in the future, in an absolutely 
identical manner. For example, one of us who served as an officer during 
the war had the following dream. He was having dinner with his own 
brother, who was stationed in the town of Vicenza. All of a sudden the 
light went off three times; this was a signal for incoming enemy planes, but 
the dreamer did not know this. Everyone started to run toward a bunker, 
across a public square, which the dreamer had never seen before. Somebody 
knocked against the dreamer's brother, who fell. In the darkness, the per- 
son in question helped his brother up, and finally both made it to the 
bunker as the first explosions were already audible. Our friend, strongly 
impressed by the dream, told it to his comrades and also wrote to an ac- 
quaintance in Vicenza to make sure that nothing had happened. 

Nothing had happened. However, a few months later, when he happened 
to be in Vicenza to visit his brother, everything that he had dreamed of took 
place, down to the smallest details, as if he had seen the same movie twice. 

Before discussing what these phenomena can tell us concerning the 
nature of time, we must further distinguish three views of time itself. Time 
may be conceived in the following ways: 

a) Creatively: as free becoming, or as a current that produces facts 
that did not exist before and which do not obey any law of neces- 
sity; their order is time itself, 

b) As the flow of consecutive events, which can be entirely explained 
on the basis of necessary and sufficient causal conditions. 

c) As the simple, irreversible, and linear order of the contents of 

human experience. 

It is evident that phenomena such as we have described are incompat- 
ible with the first view of time: foresight implies predetermination, and 
predetermination excludes contingency, which is characteristic of a free 
and creative spontaneity Their compatibility with the second view depends 
on whether or not there is a possibility of connecting foresight to a knowl- 
edge of the causes, in which supposedly reside the genus of what necessity 
will unfailingly produce. 



306 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

However, we must consider that in precognitive phenomena there is no 
knowledge of causes; there is nothing inferential or intellectual about cog- 
nition, as in the case of scientific predictions. Rather, cognition is given in 
the form of a more or less direct perception, and, in the third group of these 
phenomena, in the form of a vision of a future event. However, this diffi- 
culty could be overcome by imagining that the event is in the causes just 
as the idea of a building, which is about to be built, exists in the mind of its 
architect. In that case, the prediction could be explained in terms of some 
sort of visualized perception of this idea, which has happened through 
contact with a supersensible context. Likewise, on the human plane, a 
person may telepathically perceive that which somebody else has in mind 
and wishes to carry out. 

All the same, we must admit that under these considerations we can 
grant a certain character of reality to time only on condition of not adopt- 
ing from the outset a radical, deterministic perspective, identifying the 
possible with the real. In fact, an idea is distinguished from reality only 
due to the fact that it remains a "possibility' 5 namely something that may 
also not be, which may or may not be realized. Were this not so, there 
would be no difference whatsoever between the vision of the idea (i.e. , the 
vision-idea perceived in the causes) and the vision of the corresponding 
fact. In that case, it would be as if the future event itself could be seen; or 
as if it were already present. In that case, the interval of becoming that 
separates the future from the present would be a sheer illusion and a merely 
human mirage. In other words, the future will not be: it already is. These 
are the logical consequences we have to draw if an absolute and accurate 
precognition were possible in every case. 

Man is a cognitive being, and as such this eventuality should hardly 
bother him; it should rather cheer him up, since he would then be able to 
overcome the law of time that limits his horizon to the narrow prison of 
the present. He would also enjoy the possibility of floating above the past 
and the future, thus partaking of the omniscience and extra-temporality 
attributed to a divine eye. This is the fascination of the gift or power of 
prophetic knowledge, for we cannot designate that knowledge otherwise 
which, on an initiatic plane, corresponds to the sporadic extra-normal fac- 
ulty at work in the common phenomena of precognition. 

But besides existing as a cognitive being, man is also, and above all, a 



307 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

being who acts. This complicates matters. In fact, the reality of time is 
connected to a large degree to the reality of freedom and to the value of 
action. If every future event can be known and even seen, this means at 
least that it is predetermined; however, if there is freedom, there must be 
some indetermination in the future that depends on the faculty to freely 
choose and to act, in other words to bring about what otherwise would not 
be, or not to bring about that which otherwise would be. If we take away 
this condition and nullify the reality of time and becoming, then the striv- 
ing, acting, fighting, and the alleged power of human beings to create or 
transform reality would all merely be appearances connected to a state of 
intoxication and illusion before some kind of absolute space, before a world 
of things and events that never were, nor will be, nor cease to be, but 
simply arf., unchanging. 

Everyone can see the seriousness of the question, and the necessity of 
carefully examining all the factors before making up our minds about it. 
And yet this is not easy. People do not like to believe in what does not 
soothe them; moreover, they are naturally inclined to give priority to their 
feelings and prejudices over facts. Thus, concerning this matter, many 
people are inclined to "reason" along these lines: "We have the feeling of 
freedom, therefore it is not possible to have a real vision of the future"; and: 
"Human beings must be morally responsible for their actions, therefore the 
future cannot (i.e., we are not allowing it to) be predetermined." But real- 
ity could not care less about human feelings and wishes. What is must be 
judged by the data of experience and not by one's impressions and feelings 
of what "must be." Only after facing with a calm gaze that which is can one 
take action in order to change what can eventually be changed. 

Having said this, let us examine in more detail the three categories in 
which we have classified the phenomena of foresight. It is easy to see how 
the first one, concerning the true premonitions and forebodings, leaves an 
ample margin to freedom. In many instances, these warnings that come to 
people in an extra-normal way help them to take certain actions when 
confronted by events that would otherwise be violent or fatal. The case of 
the trip that was providentially anticipated as a result of an intuition clearly 
points to this possibility. 

In the case of the two other categories, the difficulty increases. How- 
ever, one may raise a general objection. True, there are correct premonitions: 



308 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

but there are also many others that do not come to pass. Should we under- 
stand this as a mere error due to an imperfect visionary faculty in people, 
thus admitting that what had wrongly been foreseen could also have been 
accurately foreseen? This is one possible interpretation. Yet there is an- 
other one: we may suppose that many u wrong" premonitions were accurate 
at first, corresponding to a more probable sequence of causes (perhaps with 
prevision of their effects), and thus liable to produce that effect in the nor- 
mal course of events. Such premonitions became "false" only later on, due to 
the intervention or unforeseen awakening of other causes. 

If this is true, then there is still room for freedom. Whether or not this is 
so could even in some cases be verified in an experimental fashion. Even in 
the limiting case that is not a prediction, but a prevision of the future event 
that is not announced but previously seen, with myself acting in this way or 
that, it would be necessary that at the moment of the occurrence of the event 
I was overcome by total amnesia, so as to follow automatically the course of 
events. But if all of a sudden I remembered and knew: "What I have previ- 
ously seen is happening right now," in many cases one could also intervene 
and try to bring about a different outcome. And if one succeeded in doing so, 
even to a small degree, the thesis of an absolute fatalism would be avoided, 
since the power to falsify one's precognition was demonstrated, 161 

There are other cases to be considered, namely those in which it was 
possible to foresee the event not because it necessarily had to happen, but 
rather for the opposite reason. It was the fact that it was foreseen that 
determined it, thus actualizing the foresight. In a trivial context, this often 
happens due to suggestion. After placing blind faith in certain individuals 
who are known to foresee the future, how many people have fallen victim 
to self-suggestion, thus causing the events foretold to come true? 

But this may occur in a wider and more important context. In some 
instances the precognition, instead of a seeing, is a real predetermining 
act, the arranging of the causes for the event in question. Obviously, this 
falls outside the boundaries of ordinary life and within the context of some 



161. We should still consider cases in which what is done to prevent a certain prophecy 
from coming true may also lead to its fulfillment. See, for instance, various tales or 
ancient, legends, the most famous of which is that of Oedipus. However, this is not the 
above-mentioned case, which presupposes knowledge at the moment of the occurrence of 
the foreseen event. 



309 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

type of magic. I will mention only one example, that of the auspices and 
auguries that played an important role in ancient Roman life. From many 
testimonies it is undoubtedly true that the practice of auspices and augu- 
ries often had the meaning of a ritua! of magical predetermination; it was 
not a matter of seeing some fatal events before they happened, but rather 
of determining beforehand certain fatal events. 

Tn many other cases, it is true this was otherwise, and yet we should 
not forget that the purpose of the ancient Roman art of auguries was not to 
announce beforehand (as if to satisfy a vain curiosity) what in any event 
was bound to happen, but rather to point to a body of circumstances and 
connections in order to direct action in an opportune and propitious (Latin 
jelix, a Roman technical term) way. Thus, this action was regarded as pos- 
sible and real, and only because of that — for a practical purpose — did the 
Romans, all the way up to the political and military leaders, attribute so 
much importance to the auspices. 162 To use a modern image, the responses 
were like weather patterns that meteorological stations communicate to 
people who intend to attempt a mountain climb: what is forecasted are 
certain atmospheric conditions, propitious or otherwise (Jaustae [auspi- 
cious] or infaustae [inauspicious,] according to the ancient Latin termi- 
nology), and with an objective character fully independent of the climb- 
ers. It is up to them whether or not they take these forecasts into account. 163 

These considerations lead us to indicate the limits that must be put to 
the concept of freedom, even for those who assert its reality. Here we may 
recall what several modern researchers (i.e., Geley and Osty) have posi- 
tively established, namely that the fulfillment of predictions has a preciser 
character, the more they concern external or collective events, or events 



162, This is evident in the Chinese oracle known as the J! Ching. The oracle does not 
refer to events but to fluid situations or to embryonic events, so to speak, helping a 
person to take them into account and to act prudently, before events may occur and force 
one in a certain direction. 

163. The situation, after all, is the same in the case at astrology, which falls within the 
same type of sciences. Astrology too, posits the problem of the degree to which the 
future is predetermined. There is a well-known saying in astrology: astra inclinant nan 
determinant (ihe siars incline, they do not determine). This means that outlines of the 
events most likely to happen are predetermined, even though in principle we should not 
exclude the possibility of a "deflecting' 1 intervention. 



310 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

connected to material passions and interests, or finally, to use a term that 
may not mean much, "fortuitous" events. It is evident that one should not 
look for freedom where it is not to be found (at least as long as we are 
limited human beings). There is obviously a sphere subject to fatality or 
contingence, inherited in toto by each of us as soon as we come into the 
world, just as all the risks and contingencies associated with the sea are 
accepted when a person decides to undertake a voyage and finally boards 
a ship. Thus no man can reasonably expect to claim freedom and the power 
to change things as concerns death and diseases > being struck by lightning, 
being at the center of an earthquake, or being in a war. These are all things 
that fall within the parameters of the human or, if one prefers, the earthly 
adventure. There is nothing strange about the fact that precognitions are 
possible in regard to these matters. In this case, the issue of freedom shifts 
from the material to the transcendental plane as we will explain below. 

Second, the overwhelming majority of people are so enslaved to habits, 
cravings, instincts, and fixed reactions, they are such slaves to things and 
to their own selves, that it would truly be surprising not to be able to 
forecast their future. Knowing the so-called "character" of a person, we 
can already know in an approximate way what he or she will do in certain 
circumstances. And since many circumstances depend very little on people, 
all the elements of a prediction are virtually already present. In many cases 
the faculty of forecasting is that of being able to read into the soul of an- 
other person, in that deep and subterranean area in which secret and un- 
spoken desires reside, as well as forces that may totally escape ordinary 
consciousness, though at the proper time their effects will emerge. 164 

In this context one can see that the real question is not whether one is 
free from events that may or may not occur in the future, but rather whether 
one is free from one's self, and if so, to what degree. Even in this regard one 
should avoid the abstract framing of problems in terms of simple alterna- 
tives, but rather posit the problem of freedom in reference to individual 
cases and single planes. Moreover, one should also move from the theo- 
retical plane to the practical one and instead of asking the question: "Are 



164. Thus, in modern researches, some people have tried to explain predictions on a 
"psychoanalytical" basis, namely by referring to the subconscious of the subjects to 
whom the prediction applies. This would be legitimate in some cases, provided that 
psychoanalysis had any notion of that which is truly the "subconscious." 



311 

FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

we free or not?" ask instead: "May we become free? And if so, to what 
degree and how?" 

The problem of freedom in respect to one's self, rather than in respect 
to the world of natural necessities that surrounds us, is very complex. If 
we just limited ourselves to empirical data in regard to the phenomena of 
precognition, a character of mere probability emerges whenever the fore- 
casts concern a deeper plane of life, a realm of serious decisions in which 
the whole person is engaged. From a human perspective, this would reveal 
a certain margin of indetermination that will be wider the more such deci- 
sions are taken by an individual who knows how to dominate himself. 

From a higher perspective we cannot stop here, because another prob- 
lem emerges, namely the metaphysical problem of the predestination of 
one's self. Nobody is born without certain tendencies, which according to 
esoteric doctrine are not accidental or restricted to mere biological and 
hereditary factors. Moreover, it is not by chance that one is born in a given 
place, as a member of a given race, at a certain time, and so on. Obviously 
this doctrine is related to the doctrine of the soul's preexistence (which 
should not be confused with the mistaken belief in reincarnation). Ac- 
cording to this doctrine, which has an initiatic character and was known 
both in the East and in the ancient West, the Self not only preexists the 
human individuality but also determines the nature and general meaning 
of its earthly manifestation, namely the particular life that it is going to 
live. How this determination occurs and to what degree absolute freedom 
is to be found in it are issues that must be left undecided, for the very 
reason that the problem may differ from individual to individual. To be 
sure, there is a moment, outside of time, in which the Self is the Lord of 
birth; this is the point that determines what the Hindu tradition calls the 
"causal body" and what the ancient West called the "daimon* (in a special 
meaning of the term). This body/daimon condenses, so to speak, the "fa- 
tal" and prenatal element out of which a particular finite existence will 
unfold. This casts a new light on what in many cases makes the phenom- 
ena of precognition possible. 

Now, if a man lives the life that the Self has properly chosen for itself, or has 
been led to choose, we can see that the thesis of freedom may be as correct 
as that of necessity depending on the point of view. From a merely human 
point of view, namely from that of the individuated Self (as opposed to that 



312 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

of the individuating Self), we must keep in mind that in almost ever}- case 
desire is the instrumental force that determines birth and that continues to 
act in the life it has chosen. Desire is the opposite of the "steady state" of 
being and of knowledge (see the translated text from the Kularnava Tantra 
in chapter III); it is yearning for something else, being moved by some- 
thing else, shifting from one object to another, turning from one state to 
another, as a result of being either attracted to (i.e., identifying with) or 
rejected by something or someone. The origin and fundament of the hu- 
man experience of time is no different. For a being who does not crave or 
strive toward something, and who does not desire (not only in the ordi- 
nary subjective sense, but in the deeper and metaphysical sense as well), 
there would not be an experience of time, or at least there would be the 
experience of a different time altogether. Things take on the aspect of tem- 
porality in virtue of being absorbed into the deep thrust of life; they are 
situated in time, and the world itself appears as a becoming, just as to 
passengers inside a train the countryside appears to be flying by and trans- 
forming in various scenes one after the other. 

Thus it seems that time is not a substantial mode of things. It inter- 
venes necessarily and imposes its law only on the plane of a given form of 
experience that is defined by "desire." When the various potentialities of 
the life that the Self has chosen for itself are actualized on the basis of 
desire, not only does the meaning of such life become elusive, but every- 
thing unfolds as in a state of dreaming or sleepwalking. It is only in rare 
instances that this state will be interrupted, in moments of insight and 
recollection in which the Self assumes again its active function as the cen- 
ter, presiding over and directing the fateful elements of its earthly life. 
Mereshkowsky, in his book on Napoleon, used the very proper expression 
of remembering the future (though he may not have fully understood its 
meaning), in relation to the capability of some exceptional people to intuit 
in a very clear manner what is going to happen, and to choose invariably 
the right course of action that will generate a whole set of circumstances. 
We could not better express the sense of those moments of awakening 
during which there reemerges in the Self the state of the "Lord of the birth/ 1 
and thus of the subject of transcendental freedom. 

Such a perspective is amplified on the path of initiation and of high 
asceticism, since the latter is necessarily the way in which this type of 



313 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

eternalizcttion of consciousness occurs. Wherever the basic condition of 
"desire" is overcome, and thereby the object is purified from an object of 
desire into an object of contemplation, the overcoming of the temporal con- 
dition ensues naturally (though in different degrees). I am referring here 
to the liberation of the self and of the object and thus to the possibility of 
capturing in a synthetic way (i.e., in the synthesis of its profound mean- 
ing) what ordinary consciousness would regard as events analytically ar- 
ranged along a temporal series, as a mere sequence of "facts" or events 
more or less endured, and confused acts of the "will." 

When light is shed on such horizons and an eye opens that is not merely 
human, it does not necessarily follow that life ends and action ceases. Rather, 
this is the moment when one may become supremely active and realize the 
human experience according to the goal one has chosen for oneself. This 
realization occurs without confusing the role being played with the actor 
performing it, or the individual subject with the detached Self who, without 
acting, directs the course of actions (i,e,, the purusha of Samkya philoso- 
phy). 165 The experience of time itself then assumes another quality, and al- 
most moves into another dimension. It is no longer a "chronological time," 
nor "becoming" or "flowing," but rather a rhythmic time, which is not indif- 
ferent to what goes on within it, but rather restores itself in terms of an 
organic development, in which an intimate connection of meaning links the 
Self and its experience, rendering the separate contents as integral parts of a 
whole that then produces the meaning of that life. It will be apparent after a 
little reflection how things are, in this case, in regard to the capability of 
foreseeing future events; it is easy to see that here the precognitive power 
does not jeopardize freedom, but that the opposite is true, 166 in the sense that 
the Self becomes central with respect to the causes of what will take place. 



165. In reference to this, see the initiatic expression, easy enough to grasp: "He who no 
longer has a daimon." 

166. Those who merely looked at appearances could sometimes have the impression that 
the opposite is true, since in an integrated life everything that is random, accidental, and 
arbitrary, and which as such could leave some margin to a more or less insignificant and 
illusory freedom, is gradually limited; in that case, everything appears to obey its own 
logic, law, and meaning; just as in the development of a musical piece, in which every 
particular element, including the apparent dissonances and variations, converge in 
various ways in the overall development. 



314 
FREEDOM, PRECOGNITION, AND THE RELATIVITY OF TIME 

When we think the problem through, we may ask whether at this point 
we can find the power to make the future unfold in one certain way rather 
than in another. In absolute terms we must answer in the affirmative; but 
from the point of view of the Self who is involved in the earthly experi- 
ence, this would amount to being in contradiction with itself, or to want 
something other than what it originally wanted, almost like someone who 
has begun to weave a certain pattern and all of a sudden decides to stop or 
to begin an altogether different one. Again, still in absolute terms, we do 
not see what could prevent a "detached" Self from contradicting itself, if it 
so pleases. But this is a dieoretical extreme, and it is senseless to consider 
it from a practical point of view. The incoherence that one may encounter 
(as all too often is the case) concerns a far more inferior plane; it is to this 
incoherence, at best, that the "freedom" in ordinary life is reduced, which 
is then used to disintegrate it and deprive it of eveiy deeper meaning, within 
the limits that the world of necessity allows it. 167 

Summing up: in regard to time, in supreme knowledge there certainly 
cannot be any. In this knowledge, events do not "become," but are. This is 
true in regard to their being events in an absolute sense, and not events 
that concern the life of a given acting subject. From this second, contin- 
gent point of view, they are mere possibilities; only those that the Self elects 
and wills when it assumes a given form and destiny become actualized. 
The order of this actualization constitutes the temporal series, which is 
lived in either an active or a passive fashion. In both cases, time will al- 
ways have a relative character. Thus, of the three views of time that I out- 
lined at the beginning of this essay, the third one appears to be the correct 
one, both from the common human perspective and from the exceptional 
perspective of one who has become the active subject of his own destiny: 
time is a mere form of earthly experience and has no foundation in the 
world of Reality 



167, We may add that the condition of modern man has been determined along this 
path. Overall, he no longer knows what he is, what he wants, or the meaning of what he 
is doing, since his inner unity has broken down into contradictory and opposing forces; 
their sphere of action is very limited in regard to "fateful" factors that, in this case, act in 
the sense of determinism and brutal necessity. 



Commentary on the 
Opus Magicum 



Tv 



hose who are involved in preliminary practices aimed at achieving "de- 
tachment" need to realize that, in the overwhelming majority of cases, 
they must expect the appearance of intermediate negative stages, charac- 
terized by a suspension of ''spontaneous" activity These are partial mani- 
festations of what constitutes the Hermetic black (nigredo) state, and in 
general, the critical point of "initiatic death." However, the plane to which 
I now turn is that of the individual faculties. 

Let us take the case of a person who is used to creative writing. Writing, 
in most cases, is not something that depends entirely on us. We all know 
how many times, when trying to come up with some ideas, we just sat 
there, unable to write anything, while, on the contrary, when sitting at the 
desk with an empty head, we may have experienced the flow of creative 
energy that takes us even farther than where we originally intended to go. 
This margin of grace is found just about everywhere in the course of ordi- 
nary life, during which human beings receive more gifts than they realize. 

When taking up initiatic techniques, it may happen that a person's spon- 
taneous faculty of writing will gradually disappear or become diminished; 
a certain state of inner rigidity may occur, resulting in the inability to write 
anything at all. This is the dead point. But as long as one does not give up, 
remains calm, and proceeds, one will notice a gradual reemergence of the 
lost or diminished faculty. At this point this faculty may acquire another 
meaning and the person may really claim it as his own. He will master it, 
and be able to exercise it at any time, at will, unlike the previous state. 
Moreover, when writing, there will no longer be a sort of waiting for some- 
thing to come from outside, followed by identification, a hesitation, an 
attempt to follow some direction until a new "inspiration" and the pro- 
duction of thought-associations set in. Instead of all this, an active lucidity 
will preside over the entire process. 



316 
COMMENTARY ON THE OPUS MAGICUM 

The same is true for other faculties: it is a suspension and then a reacti- 
vation truly from within, from the substance of the Self. Everything that 
the Self received as a gift from "nature" in the form of spontaneity at first 
abandons the Self, but then returns as something that really belongs to its 
substance. Thus, analogous modifications may also be manifested for 
thought in general. A particular instance of this concerns memory. Very 
often one reaches a point where remembering one*s self is virtually impos- 
sible. But then a new form of memory sets in, which is no longer mechani- 
cal or accidental as the ordinary one was. Another characteristic instance 
is that of the spoken word. It is not as though one becomes mute: but to 
express oneself with words becomes difficult; the words are blocked from 
within. However, the word that returns from beyond the dead end is al- 
most another type of word: it is a word that reflects something of the char- 
acter of the living word or magical word. Even from a physical perspective, 
Yoga treatises mention a clearing and the assuming of another tone and 
strength in one's voice, as a result of following certain practices. 

One should not fail to realize all this, especially in order to avoid judg- 
ing the negative states in the wrong light, so as not to be alarmed and 
discouraged. 

I will add that this phenomenology occurs above all in an autonomous 
discipline, which is pursued in the context of ordinaiy life, without the 
intervention of proper ritual practices. 



lagla 

Serpentine Wisdom 



O 



They^ burn with fire — we burn with water; 
they wash with water — we wash with fire. 

— Van Helmoni 



ccultism 168 has an extremely subtle "virtue." It is "serpentine." And it 
is also essential 

People in general have their cliches, their ethical, religious, or social 
ideals, their opinions about Strength, Wisdom, and Greatness. But all in 
all, occultism is a very different thing. It is elusive and cannot be measured. 
It comes from the opposite direction from the one everyone is looking 
toward. Thus it goes unnoticed; or if it is noticed, it disconcerts. It robs of 
their certainties those who thought they were secure, who thought they 
had their feet on the ground. 

The occultist is a being who cannot be measured by ordinary standards. 
Nobody knows what he is really capable of, nor what his action consists 
of. His path is impenetrable. You may be his best friend, his companion, 
and even his lover; you may think you own his heart, his affection, or his 
devotion. And yet, he will be an other, besides the one you already know 
You will become aware of this "other" one only when you enter his domain. 
Then you will feel as if you had been walking along the edge of an abyss. 

Never mind the Fact that today in the West there are countless people 
who declare themselves to be occultists, Masters, Initiates, etc., and would 
be very displeased if one were not aware of their presumed quality. Let me 
say again that, with some remarkable exceptions, it is rare for a true ini- 
tiate to come forward and to reveal himself outside his own circle. The real 



168. Let us allow lagla to use the term "occultism/ 1 much as we would have preferred to 
avoid it 5 considering what "occultism" means these days. We could not come up with a 
better term, because it is not a question here of the pure type of the Adept but only of a 
few particular traits of his action, for which, as one can see, lagla draws especially upon 

the Far Eastern tradition. 



319 
SERPENTINE WISDOM 

initiate lives in a state that categorically destroys any dependency on people. 
What the latter say or think about him, and whether the opinion they 
form of him is accurate or not — these things no longer concern him. Due 
to an "irresistible" inclination, people want others to "know" who they are 
(worse yet, what they think they are). When they act, they also want every- 
one else to know about it; the absence of reactions and a natural impassi- 
bility in the face of an unjust comment or action are not typical of them. 
An occultist finds all this to be puerile. He does not exist. Let others try to 
grasp air, if that is what they enjoy He can pull the rug from under their 
feet, and he will do it when the occasion arises, without them even realiz- 
ing from where the action arose or even if there was an action at all. Do 
they wish to strike him on the cheek? Let them. He will even turn the 
other one: he plays only those games in which he is the one dictating all 
the rules. He is at the mercy of nobody. He alone decides what reactions 
must arise in himself due to other people's words, actions, or qualities. 
Call him a hero, call him a coward: he does not care either way He is only 
concerned with what effects follow these thoughts of others, what their 
consequences are for his game. He cares only to make some things occur: 
he calmly and coolly establishes the means and the conditions, he acts, 
and that is all. He does not adhere to his action as if it were his own. Above 
all he does not talk about it, nor does he care about the outcome. The action 
is a mere instrument. He is immune from the mania of "self-affirmation." 

The more an occultist progresses, the more deeply his center recedes 
and the more those upon whom he acts will have the perfect illusion of 
being free. I do not know how well known this characteristic of occultism 
is these days. It does not help for it to be known; it is better unnoticed. 
However, 1 know that too often in the West occultism is distorted by alien 
views and by profane prejudices. People know little and talk much. Thus 
the chance for mistakes and misunderstandings is great. Yet we should not 
give any support to those who do not even know where the true principles 
He, and for whom occultism is just another excuse for games and manias 
that they divert the public with. In this volume we have often referred to 
the "will," "action," and the "Self/ The authors of these essays know what 
they mean by these concepts. But I am not sure if our readers understand 
that here will is not will, action is not action, and the Self is not the Self. 

About twenty-five hundred years ago, a small book was written in China. 



320 
SERPENTINE WISDOM 

In this book, the principles of a subtle and Hermetic wisdom are set forth in 
a clear, cool, and lucid form: I am talking of course about Lao-tzu's Tao~te 
Ching. It may be helpful to recall here the main themes of this practical 
wisdom, which is timeless and boundless. It is an unequivocal reference 
point. It is very dangerous, yet absolute, I do not know of anything more 
absolute than it. It has a sense of surgery. An essential transparency No 
echo of human limitations and manias. There, one can breath and fully be. 

Although it may be based in legend, Confucius's encounter with Lao- 
tzu, narrated by Cho-Hong in the Si Sien Chuen, is very meaningful. Ac- 
cording to Cho-Hong, Confucius, who tried to involve Lao-tzu in his pre- 
occupation with customs, morality and tradition, received such answers 
from him that, when reflecting several years later on this encounter, he 
wrote: "It is possible to set a trap in order to catch animals; it is possible to 
catch fishes with nets and to catch birds with arrows. But how will one 
capture the dragon that flies in the air above the clouds?" 

This is how the maxims of the Tao-te Ching gradually define the nature 
of the Fulfilled One, the Ambiguous, the Subtle, the Elusive. The text be- 
gins in this manner 169 : "The Way that is the Way is not the ordinary way 
The Name that is the Name is not the ordinaiy name." Men steal life; they 
are outside the center and draw outside of it the virtues that should remain 
deep and invisible. They construct the puppet of "personality," instead of 
being; then they grasp it, clamped on and tenacious as beasts. They accu- 
mulate, absorb, clutch, and "affirm" ad infinitum; Me! Me! Me! The mask, 
the grimace become everything. They do not realize that this is fever, er- 
ror, mania. Death lies in wait within the shell they erected. And death cuts 
them down. They are larvae ejected from the Great Game, 

This is what the Fulfilled One says: true affirmation, absolute individu- 
ality are not the affirmation or the individuality known to men; rather, the 
latter is a way of illusion and corruption. People talk about possessing, 
and know not what possession is. They talk about "strength, 51 but what 
they refer to is a mere fable. The Fulfilled One says: only by losing itself 
can the Self become individualized, ceasing to "affirm" in order to really be 
individuals and Lords of the Self. One cannot have while hanging on; one 
cannot become sharper by grasping. The Fulfilled One disappears — thus 



169. The English version here follows closely that used by lagla, which comes from J. 
Evola, ed, II libro della Via e ddla Vita di Laotze, Carabba, Lanciano, 1921 . (Editor's note) 



321 
SERPENTINE WISDOM 

he reveals; he empties himself— thus he achieves absolute being. In order 
to reach the peak, he conceals his Self. By giving away, he earns; by giving 
away he is rich. He lets go, dissolves, and ascends. He lets go of the ray 
abolishes splendor, and fixes himself in the invisible origin. Concentrated, 
he achieves — scattered, he fails. From fullness he shifts to "emptiness." 
There lies the essence of fullness, just as in the center lies the essence of 
the wheel. From movement he goes to what, as the real cause of motion, is 
itself motionless. From being, to that which, in its incorporeity; is nonbeing. 
"Self," "non-Self," "will" — all manias! Earnings become a loss. He who 
stands on his toes does not grow taller, nor is walking a random jerking of 
the legs. He who puts himself in the spotlight remains in the dark; he who 
thinks he has arrived finds himself pushed back; to show oneself is to be 
dependent; to take care of oneself is to decay; to make efforts is useless, 
insane, and takes one even farther from the path. The more he "affirms" 
and the more he goes outside, the more he affirms nothingness. 

Unless you quit the game of resistance, of ownership, of your will, you 
will not cease to be fooled; the Path is something else- To will without will- 
ing to will; to act without willing to act; to achieve without doing; to do 
without being the doer; to elevate oneself without dominating. Straight but 
flexible, clear though not shining — this is what Lao-tzu says. To truly be 
consists in not wishing to be. Lao-tzu turns all human "values" upside down. 
He smiles at you, as if you were a little child, when you wear the mask of the 
"conqueror/ 1 the "superman," or of him who "breaks but does not bend," 
How naive! He says about water: there is nothing in the world like water, 
ready to assume any form — and yet nothing is more capable of defeating 
what is strong and rigid. Water cannot be tamed because it adapts itself to all 
things; because it offers no resistance, it cannot be captured. The "virtue" of 
Heaven imitates it. The flexible triumphs over the rigid, and the weak tri- 
umphs over the strong. The tools of death are strong and hard; the tools of 
life are subtle and flexible. The former are below, the latter are above. The 
latter direct the former; the bodiless penetrates matter's impenetrability. 

Those who expose themselves create a chance to be stricken down. The 

strong tree is cut down Failing is occasioned by "willing," loss is made 

possible by attachment; there is no action that does not provoke a reac- 
tion. Thus, a good wrestler does not use violence; a good wanner does not 
struggle; a good walker leaves no traces; a good director does not direct; a 



322 
SERPENTINE WISDOM 

good guard does not need locks; a good capturer does not use ropes. A 
truly winning army does not need to "fight" — it has never even considered 
the struggle or the possibility of having to struggle. See how bewildering 
all this is? Against this you cannot find a hold, you find no resistance 
although you feel a force against which you can do nothing, a force that 
first of all takes away the possibility of a struggle, because a sword cannot 
strike air, and a net cannot catch water. Those who have been "bitten by 
the Dragon" possess this strength: they direct worldly affairs through this 
strength, operating with it, remaining invisible and silent behind the scenes. 
To them people are nothing (just as people are nothing to the impersonal 
powers of nature): they employ them like instruments — says Lao-tzu — 
without experiencing love or hatred, good or ill. Does a builder behave 
any differently toward the stones he employs? The infinitely wide square 
no longer has corners; the infinitely wide container is bottomless; the infi- 
nitely acute sound is no longer audible; the infinitely wide image no longer 
has a form. This is the teaching of Lao-tzu. The lack of traces is the trace of 
his Perfect One. In the immensity of the strength of his spirit, compared to 
the limited consciousness of human beings, he appears to hardly know he 
exists. In the guise of weakness, he has true strength; he knows he is pow- 
erful and yet appears weak. He knows he is enlightened and yet appears 
small and mediocre. He dulls what is sharp, clarifies what is confused, 
tones down his shining nature, and is outwardly identical with what is 
ordinary. He progresses without advancing; he absorbs without conquer- 
ing; he has without owning. Becoming like everybody else, he becomes 
different from everybody. As he goes on, he is as prudent as one who crosses 
a winter stream; vigilant as one who knows he is surrounded by enemies; 
cold as a stranger; ephemeral as a melting snowfiake; rough as a tree trunk; 
wide as the great valleys; impenetrable as deep water; inaccessible as soli- 
tary peaks. He arrives without walking; he penetrates without looking; 
achieves without willing; acts without doing; he just vanishes. He is obeyed 
without commanding; he wins without struggling; he draws people to him- 
self without calling for them. How disheartening to those who uphold the 
myth of manhood based on muscles and metallic strength: this alone is the 
true man, the absolute man! He absorbs within himself the ambiguous vir- 
tue of the female. Lao-tzu talks about the invisible magic of the feminine, 
which in a feline fashion attracts and absorbs in itself mans action; and he 



323 
SERPENTINE WISDOM 

compares it to the image of dark, hidden valleys, drawing to themselves in 
an irresistible way the. water of the alpine peaks. 

"The Way that is the Way is not the ordinary way;" 1 indeed. Do you 
know what your "heroes," your "martyrs," and your "men of character" 
are? Creatures of vanity, and nothing more. "I break but do not bend": 
what you mean is that for the sake of the "beautiful gesture" and for the 
proud satisfaction, I feed my ego, 1 sacrifice reality. What a child! Lao-tzu 
does not hide behind the smoke screen of the "heroic" and the "tragic. 1 ' 
Being cool and lucid, he only cares to fulfill. You advance? He pulls back 
and then returns like the wave: "It is better to step back a foot than to gain 
an inch: among two combatants, the one who wins is the one who does 
not fight." Do you put forth an obstacle, or an "affirmation?" He lets you 
go ahead, goes underground, and cuts you down at the root. He antici- 
pates that which is not yet manifest; acts upon that which is still weak; 
resolves a crisis before it erupts. He withdraws; he aims at acting where 
there are no conditions or defenses, where there is no "cause" — in other 
words, where there is nothing against which an effect may react. 

Lao-tzu says: people do not know what action is. Today we have the 
religion of "effort," "becoming," "action." What matters is not to arrive, 
but to "aim at the infinite," the "struggle," the "eternal aspiration." Men 
need action in order to be aware of themselves, rather than to attain. The 
more they are caught, excited, and carried away, the happier they are. Thus 
they feel more, because naturally they need to "feel themselves" , . . What a 
disaster, the day they no longer encounter resistance! They would burst 
like the soap bubbles they are. And this is exactly what happens at death, 
when the solid casing that helped them to "reflect" their consciousness is 
broken; then the knot is untied and is dissolved into the infinite ether, in 
which there is no support or direction, namely into the dragons domain. 

To level out, to be silent, to disappear; the voice without words; sight 
without objects; possession without touch; action without movement. This 
is the way of the Tao. Is it a paradox? A nonsense? These are just words, 
swarming around the royal elephant like tiny flies. But you, who want to 
reach the other bank of the river, pay attention to what Lao-tzu says: "Just 
as the fish could not live if it left the dark abysses, likewise the ordinary 
person cannot know the weapon of this wisdom of the Lord," 



Luce 

Invocations 

A Complement to the Instructions Concerning 
Ceremonial Magic Given in Chapter VII 



I 



n the system of rituals and practices that are part of Ceremonial Magic., 
invocations or prayers play an important if not a preponderant role, since 
they accompany every act that is performed; in and of themselves, they 
often constitute real ritual forms. 

Let us remember what has been said on other occasions by several writ- 
ers and hinted at in this book: prayer does not consist in the mere move- 
ment of the lips and in the utterance of words, but rather in an act that is 
sometimes voluntary and cerebral (when the operation is limited to ac- 
tions on the physical and astral planes, or on beings occupying a lower 
hierarchical place), but, more often than not, eminently spiritual (when it 
is addressed to higher Beings, in order to receive from them help, illumi- 
nation, dignification). 

Considering the purpose of this preliminary Ritual, namely to elevate 
the soul beyond the barriers and the bonds of physical nature and thus to 
put it in direct contact with the Spirits whose body is light and splendor, 
the verbal expression must be brought to its peak performance with maxi- 
mal efficacy and it must be vivified with "fire and spirit." This is brought 
about through constant aspiration. 

The oration is not generically determined in time or space. When reciting 
it, one does not need instruments or signs. Moreover, it is not necessary 
always to employ the same formula, since this could turn into a mechani- 
cal habit (except in special cases where it is necessary, as in the system of 
Rituals and for magical chains). 

The invocations that 1 will give may serve as a general scheme on which 
the operator can improvise in the course of the ritual, or also repeat them 
literally, reading them, or, better, memorizing them, as long as paying at- 



325 
INVOCATIONS 

tention to the reading or memorization does not detract from the spiritual 
intensity of the invocation itself. 

Usually, all invocations need to be performed while standing up, facing 
eastward, sometimes staring at the magic mirror. 

[before an ablution] 

Before bathing according to the ablution ritual, concentrate in the spirit, 
lay your hands on the water, and say: 

— Numen of the deep sea; Numen who with your power dominate all the 
waters spread throughout the world; I invoke you and call you, who arise and 
calm the storms, you, the Lord oj clear springs and pure streams, you who rule 
the subterranean waters and the heavenly waters and who distribute every- 
where the element that is life to the universe and to the creatures who live in it. 
And I call you, Daimons and Genii, who are the ministers of his power, to 
bestow virtue on this water, so that 1 may be made pure and worthy of perform- 
ing the ritual of elevation. 

[before the meal] 

When you have prepared what you need for your meal and laid out 
everything you need at the table, turn eastward before eating, and with 
your thumb pointed toward the ground draw the sign of the Father (which 
is the sign found on page 194). As you concentrate in the spirit, lay your 
hands over the food and say: 

— Father; supreme cultivator of the mystical fields, I consecrate to you 
this food, which is the worthy fruit of the earth, I invoke your presence so that 
it may nourish in me my own substance, and so that in the process of trans- 
formation it may communicate a new strength and value to the mind and to 
the soul, so that the spirit may quickly rise and attain perfect communion. 

[before getting dressed] 

Prior to donning the linen vestment that you will use in the ritual, 
concentrate in the spirit and say; 

— O Most High, I am wearing the immaculate vestment that is the symbol 
of my purity. I beseech you, let purity remain within me and shine with your 
light and with your help. 



326 
INVOCATIONS 

[consecration of the room] 

Upon entering the room you have chosen to perform the ritual in, and 
in which the necessary objects are already laid out, face eastward, concen- 
trate in the spirit and say: 

— O Great Unknown, I come to this place that has been isolated from 
worldly noises in order to know your ynystery. I consecrate this room to you, 
and everything that is in it. Thus, I am ready to light the unquenchable lamp 
and the fire that is the symbol of my burning spirit My spirit raises its perfume 
up to you, as the yearning for knowledge uses toward the mystery, so that you 
may be manifested to me. 

[consecration of fire] 

As you remain concentrated in the spirit, first light the lamp and then, 
with its flame, ignite the coals. Then say: 

— Infinite power permeating the universe and all beings, Most High in the 
heavens, Lord of the deep abyss, soul of the world, soul of being, Genii of the 
flame, Daimons of fire, Entities who wander in space, Intelligences who gener- 
ate life, I invoke and call out to you all: be present and let your virtue be 
transmitted to the ardor that I arouse and invoke, that it may remain in me 
now and forever — Flame, flame: bum! 

[consecration of perfumes] 

Take a little bit of perfume, throw it on the burning coals, hold high 
above them the vessel containing the perfume, and say; 

— O Supreme, to Thee I consecrate these aromas that, burning, rise in 
the air, as my being, burning with the sacred flame of the spirit and purified, 
rendered whole in its elements, rises toward Thee. O potent one, I invoke 
Thee, that Thy virtue may descend upon me, that Thou shouldest grant that 
wherever this flame and this perfume burn, these shall be the strength of the 
sanctified spirit, nor shall adverse shades dare to disturb it. And You, Spirits 
of the elements, Genii, and Entities, I call You, worthy Ministers of the most 
high Lord, to be present and let this air be the material of your appearance to 
the senses. 

After saying that, blow twice with long breaths on the fire. 



327 
INVOCATIONS 

(consecration of signs] 

Draw the ritually prescribed signs. Having done that, throw more per- 
fume on the fire and say: 

— Father, according to Thy law, which dominates the universe and every 
being, I have drawn these $igns> in the Name of the Spirit, the Unknown, and 
the Operation. My will and my aspiration are in them. May they lead me, with 
Thy help, to the knowledge that I strive to attain. 

[invocation] 

Throw more perfume on the fire, and as you remain concentrated in 
the spirit, look eastward, then south, west, and north; blow four times in 
these directions, three times for each direction, slowly and with force, al- 
most hissing. Before each breath, inhale as deeply as you can. When you 
exhale, invoke in the spirit the Genius, still unknown to you, who presides 
over that direction. Having done that, turn eastward, and, while keeping 
the right thumb toward the ground and the other fingers clasped, say: 

— Unknown, Supreme Master, who guides the secret destinies of the 
Sacred Temple, I invoke you. Be favorable to me, and let your strong aim be 
my help; protect me and defend me against the dangers of my inferior nature 
and against all the forces that can oppose the fulfillment of my aspirations. 

O Infinite, who .shines eternally, crowned with flames and living harmo- 
nies, Spirit of Light and of Wisdom, you give life to all things with Your Breath, 
Spirit of Spirits, eternal soul of souls, unchanging breath of life. In you are 
found the golden splendor and the silver whitaxess of the opposites, You are the 
invisible King who fills the abysses with your Omnipotence; You are Immortal 
and eternal, Ineffable, Uncreated, Father of all things, Lord of the ethereal 
immensity, Lord of Earth and Water, Air and Fire, Spirit of fire who vivifies all 
things., Supreme harmony, transcendent Number who reassumes the indefinite 
and determines it with Your Law, I invoke You, O Father. 

All of you, Spirits of splendor, who carry in the worlds the seal of His will, 
and are flame of His flame, 1 call upon you to assist me, so that with your help 
I may become worthy of the supreme wisdom. 

Let the source of my life be purified, the weight of matter be alleviated, so 
that I my self be the faithful mirror of the Living God and burn with sacred fire. 
Let the enlivening and bright ether pervade me, so that I may stay awake and 



328 
INVOCATIONS 

operate relentlessly; let me seek with perseverance and surely find, so that the 
day enveloped in the night may shine forever; may I live secure and no longer 
disturbed; may 1 always dwell in perfect peace; may the earth bring forth fruits, 
and the tree of life blossom, the flowing water return to the source of living 
waters. 

Master, let my will be strong and constant, so that my spirit may rise to 
You and be worthy that You may communicate to me to what You see fit. 

Having said this, concentrate for a long time in the silence of your spirit, 
focusing on asking that it may be enlightened with the Light that comes 
from above and that it may be manifested in visible form, or else a spiritual 
message. 

Keep in mind; 

No matter how the Ritual is performed, you must wait at least three 
hours after eating. Since you need to operate with bare feet, be sure to put 
on the floor a small wool or cotton mat, or something similar. 



Excerpts from 
De My sterns 

Introduced and annotated by Tikaipos 170 



We 



e have included here some excerpts from De My steriis, a theurgical 
treatise of the Alexandrian age, attributed to lamblichus, in order to present 
some states proper to the operations of ceremonial magic. 

It may be useful to emphasize that the faculties operating in magic transcend 
those human faculties in the strict sense. Therefore, considering that in the 
context, of ceremonial magic such a being is not excluded, in this and other 
similar texts we find statements that emphasize man's total passivity; the futility 
of human effort and of the "will" in these operations. However, the text also 
explicitly affirms that the Gods, in the operation itself, are not "other" in respect 
to the deepest nature of the mind. It is only one energy, making of God and of 
the mind one thing, that acts, by itself, "shining forth, operating all things 
univocally." Being inside this, the mind does not "go out," does not "fall into 
ecstasy" but instead adheres to its own perfection, to that act, of which its 
human state is only "being in potency" This act is identical to the radiant 
substance of the God, which strips the human spirit of its dark vesture. 

Invocations, prayers, and everything else only help to propitiate these 
absolute states, by operating through subtle "sympathy." Thus we should not 
think that they attract God, as if he were subject to any kind of influence; nor 
should we think that the soul is stirred by passions on the part of God, since 
there is no action on his part, but an identification with God and a realization 
of God. Therefore, God's action and the participation of the soul in the state of 
pure activity which no action from outside can affect, are one and the same. 



170. In the Italian version of this essay, the translation from the Greek was also done by 
Tikaipos ("from the edition published by Th. Gale, Osconii, L678"). Here we have 
utilized the English translation of De Mysteriis by Thomas Taylor. The italicization of 
certain words and passages reflects emphasis by Tikaipos. (Editor's note) 



330 
EXCERPTS FROM DE MYSTER1IS 

In the first place, therefore, you say, "It must be granted that there are 
Gods." Thus to speak, however, is not right on this subject. For an innate 
knowledge of the Gods is coexistent with our very essence; and this knowl- 
edge is superior to all judgment and deliberate choice, and subsists prior 
to reason and demonstration. It is also co-united from the beginning with 
its proper cause, and is consubsistent with the essential tendency of the 
soul to the good. 171 

If, indeed, it be requisite to speak the truth, the contact with Divinity is 
not knowledge. For knowledge is in a certain respect separated from its 
object by otherness. 172 But prior to the knowledge, which as one thing 
knows another, is the uniform connection with divinity, and which is sus- 
pended from the Gods, is spontaneous and inseparable from them. . . . For 
we are comprehended in it, or rather we are filled by it, and we possess 
that very thing which we are (or by which our essence is characterized), in 
knowing the Gods . . , 

Hence, as the Gods have an existence that is always invariably the same, 
thus also the human soul is conjoined to them by knowledge, according to 
a sameness of subsistence; by no means pursuing through conjecture, or 
opinion, or a syllogistic process, all that originate in time, an essence that is 
above all these, but through the pure and blameless intellections that the 
soul received from eternity from the Gods, becoming united to them, 173 

(De Mysteriis, I, 3) 

You also say "that invocations are directed to the Gods as to beings that 
are passive, so that not only demons are passive, but likewise the Gods." 
This, however, is not the case. For the illumination that takes place through 
invocations is spontaneously visible and self-perfect; is very remote from 
all downward attraction; proceeds into visibility through divine energy 



171. In Greek thought, the idea of the Good has an ontological meaning, not moral or 
virtuous. The Good is the perfection of a being, its state of completeness, as opposed to the 
sense of want and "privation," or insufficient and hampered activity. Thus in Aristotle, 
the Good is the pure act, the natural end in which it tends to perfect the energy of all 
imperfect beings. 

172. Because in the normal idea of knowledge, the known object is something other than 
the knowing subject. 

173. Elsewhere it is said the symbols are the basis for this. 



331 
EXCERPTS FROM DE MYSTER1IS 

and perfection; and as much surpasses our voluntary motion as the divine 
will of the Good transcends a deliberately chosen life. Through this will, 
therefore, the Gods, being benevolent and propitious, impart their light to 
theurgists in unen vying abundance, calling upward their souls to them- 
selves, procuring them a union with themselves, and accustoming them, 
while they are yet in body to be separated from bodies, and to be led round 
to their eternal and intelligible principle. 

But it is evident, from the effects themselves, that what we now say is 
the salvation of the soul. For the soul in contemplating blessed spectacles 
acquires another energy energizes according to another energy, and is then 
rightly considered as no longer ranking in the order of man. Frequently 
likewise, abandoning her own life, she exchanges it for the most blessed 
energy of the Gods. If, therefore, the ascent through invocations imparts 
to the priests purification from passions, a liberation from generation, and 
a union with a divine principle, how is it possible to connect with it anything 
of passion? For an invocation of this kind does not draw down the impas- 
sive and pure Gods to the passive and impure; but, on the contrary it ren- 
ders us, who have become passive through generation, pure and immutable. 

Neither do the invocations that implore the Gods to incline to us conjoin 
the priests to them through passion; but procure for them the communion 
of an indissoluble connection, through the friendship that binds all things 
together. Hence, it does not, as the name seems to imply incline the intel- 
lect of the Gods to men; but, according to the decision of Truth, renders 
the will of man adapted to the participation of the Gods, elevates it to 
them, and coharmonizes the former with the latter, through the most ap- 
propriate persuasion. On this account also, such names of the Gods as are 
adapted to the sacred concerns, and other divine symbols, are able, as they 
are of an angogic or elevating nature, to connect invocations with the Gods 
themselves. 

(De Mysteriis, I, 12) 

Farther still, having said "that pure intellects are inflexible (i.e., not to 
be changed or altered) and unmingled with sensibles," you doubt "whether 
it is requisite to pray to them/' But I think it is necessary to pray to no 
others than these. For that in us which is divine, intellectual, and one, or 



332 

EXCERPTS FROM DE MYSTERI1S 

intelligible, if you are willing so to call it, is most clearly excited in prayer: 
and when excited, vehemently seeks that which is similar to itself, and 
becomes copulated to perfection itself . . . 

For the consciousness of our own nothingness, when we compare our- 
selves with the Gods, causes us to betake ourselves spontaneously to suppli- 
ant prayer. But from supplication, we are in short time led to the object of 
supplication, acquire its similitude from intimate converse, and gradually 
obtain divine imperfection, instead of our own imbecility and imperfection. 

(De My stents, I, 15) 

Dissolving, however, the doubts in a way still more true, we think it 
requisite, in invoking superior natures, to take away the evocations that 
appear to be directed to them as to men, and also the mandates in the 
performance of works, which are given with great earnestness. For if the 
communion of concordant friendship and a certain indissoluble connec- 
tion of union are the bonds of sacerdotal operations, in order that these 
operations may be truly divine, and may transcend every common action 
known to men, no human work will be adapted to them; nor will the 
invocations of the priest resemble the manner in which we draw to our- 
selves things that are distant; nor are his mandates directed as to things 
separated from him, in the way in which we transfer one thing from oth- 
ers. But the energy of divine fire shines forth voluntarily and in common, 
and being self- invoked and self-energetic, energizes through all things with 
invariable sameness both through the natures that impart, and those that 
are able to receive, its light. This mode of solution, therefore, is far supe- 
rior that does not suppose that divine works are effected through contrari- 
ety or discrepancy, in the way in which generated natures are usually pro- 
duced; but asserts that every such work is rightly accomplished through 
sameness, union, and consent. 

(De Mysteriis, IV, 3) 

That, however, which is the greatest thing is this, that he who (appears 
to) draw down a certain divinity sees a spirit descending and entering into 
someone, recognizes its magnitude and quality, and is also mystically per- 
suaded and governed by it. But a species of fire is seen by the recipient, 



333 
EXCERPTS FROM DE MYSTERIIS 

prior to the spirit being received, which sometimes becomes manifested to 
all the spectators, either when the divinity is descending or when he is 
departing. And from this spectacle the greatest truth and power of God. 
and especially the order he possesses, as likewise about what particulars 
he is adapted to speak the truth, what the power is that he imparts, and 
what he is able to effect, become known to the scientific . . . 

But to return from this digression: if the presence of the fire of the 
Gods, and a certain ineffable species of light, externally accedes to him 
who is possessed, and if they wholly fill him, have dominion over and 
circularly comprehend him on all sides, so that he is not able to exert any 
one proper energy, what sense, or animadversion, or appropriate projec- 
tion of intellect, can there be in him who receives a divine fire? What 
human motion, likewise, can then intervene, or what human reception of 
passion or ecstasy, or of aberration of the fantasy, or of anything else of the 
like kind, such as is apprehended by the multitude, can take place? . , . 

But it is requisite also to know what enthusiasm is and how it is pro- 
duced. It is falsely, therefore, supposed to be a motion of dianoia, in con- 
junction with demonical inspiration. For human dianoia is not moved, if 
it is thus enthusiastically affected; nor is the inspiration produced by de- 
mons, but by the Gods. Neither is enthusiasm simply an ecstasy; for it is a 
reelevation and transition to a more excellent condition of being. But de- 
lirium and ecstasy evince a perversion to that which is worse. Hence, he 
who is an advocate for the latter speaks, indeed, of things that happen to 
those that energize enthusiastically, yet does not teach that which is prece- 
dent. But this consists in being wholly possessed by Divinity 

(De Mysteriis, III, 6, 7) 



The Message 
of the Polar Star 

[original in French] 



I 



t is eleven o'clock on the clock of the Universe; the Door is open and the 
elect are invited. 

For the sword has pierced the bowels of the Woman and the Word has 
been uttered within the "depth of her Womb." 

Sin no longer exists and in the New shining city, the tree of life already 
offers its first fragrant fruits to the kisses of the renewed sun. 

The Prince of the World, the Great Convict of the first hour, has atoned 
for his fault and found his bride bathed from head to foot. 

Blessed are those whose candle is lit at the new dawn; blessed are those 
who have opened their eyes to the light that shines triumphant in the 
heart of the Night, at the promised hour of renewal. 

The Son sits on his throne and sends to the four corners of the world 
his faithful servants, charged to gather the harvest. 

There is one more hour left to every creature, a brief yet decisive time. 
He who has ears to hear may still change direction and hasten to enter the 
Way and abandon Death. 

The Cup is offered to all, but the wine must be drunk willingly in ac- 
cordance to the ancient wisdom that silence has preserved intact up to this 
day. 

Now the lips are loosed and it is enough to listen in order to under- 
stand everything. 

At first there was the sign; then came the symbol; today the era of reality 
opens. 

Peace to all and joy to every just being, 

Alexandria, Egypt, 1927 



Sirius 



Mist and Symbols 



N 



ature speaks through silence, and yet only those who understand this 
may hope to know some of the secrets she harbors in her bosom. 

When we arrive at this interpretation, to the point w r here the silence of 
nature becomes almost deafening while the noises of men do not bother us 
at all, we come to realize that every single phenomenon in the universe 
has a meaning. 

Man w r alks on earth as a being who at a certain point in his life hap- 
pened to become blind. He no longer sees, but sometimes remembers that 
he used to see; the more the memory of the past is alive in him, the more 
his soul adheres to the real substance of what is invisibly confronting him. 

There is nobody who has completely forgotten everything and does not 
"recognize" any aspect of the world. The truth is that man, instead of stimu- 
lating his memory and attempting in every way to descend into the heart 
of things, attempts to forget and to transfer to immediate appearances the 
value of the reality that he intuits the presence of, but which he cannot 
attain without a spiritual effort. 

Given this premise, it is no wonder that the interest of the higher man — 
who should be simply called man — is precisely focused on that which the 
majority of people pays no attention to. To the one, everything he touches is 
but a shadow; for the others, it is a solid thing. To the one, visible things are 
but the projections or shadows of invisible things; to the others, those very 
shadows are the beginning and the end: at most, they will grant a future 
beyond life, at the same time they deny that which exists prior to life. 

If we could know the real structure of a flower or of a plant, we would be 
very close to understanding the real structure of ourselves and of our des- 
tiny If we knew in detail the law that the corolla of a rose obeys when it 
spreads its petals, we would not need to look upward to see the stars, but 
could look downward and find the firmament there. 



336 
MIST AND SYMBOLS 

If we succeeded in knowing the secret of the seasons and in seeing 
inside the earth just as we see what is upon it, at the same time we would 
clearly see within ourselves, and would recognize without hesitation that 
the upheaval that changes substance in the earth is parallel to the upheaval 
within us. 

Since the universe is one, monolithic and compact, there is no law in 
any domain that does not have an equivalent in another. Physics, geom- 
etry, algebra are moral sciences; the force of gravity, before being an active 
force in the domain of matter, is a force active in the domain of the soul. 

Those who study the physical phenomena do not leave a door open to 
mystery, but close the door to truth, by mistaking for a voice that which is 
merely an echo. Those who study a ray of sun cannot see the eyes of which 
it is a glance. They will never find the unity of phenomena; instead of pro- 
ceeding like a sculptor who unearths the statue chip by chip, they act like 
policemen looking for the perpetrator of a crime who is always on the run 
and elusive, so instead of trying to grab him, they try to arrest his footsteps. 

The state of mind of the great majority of people deserves commiseration 
and pity for they enclose the universe into two well-defined regions; one, 
consisting of phenomena the origins of which they are aware of, the other 
of which they are totally ignorant. On the one hand, the bright sun; on the 
other hand, an impenetrable mist. People are so persuaded that they have 
completed the inventory of created things and of possible phenomena that 
any phenomenon that slightly lies outside the number of those that are 
already known — or more precisely, that they think they know — is relegated 
by them to the domain of miracles, folly or chimeras. Lacking wings, it is 
a wonder that they take no offense at the existence of birds. Even their 
notion of deity is childish: on the one hand, the earth; on the other, heaven; 
on the one hand, the natural; on the other, the supernatural; on the one 
hand, man; on the other, God. There is no contact, no connection between 
the two worlds and the two beings. 

This is why the tangible reality of man, who still believes he knows it, 
has the illusion of knowledge; the more it is illusory the more it is believed 
to be complete. When judging the physical world, man does not behave 
any differently from him who, knowing only one language, wishes to travel 



337 
MIST AND SYMBOLS 

abroad and expects to be understood everywhere, characterizing those who 
speak to him in a different language from his own as "dumb." This is why 
man, w r hile believing he can dominate the world, is constantly at the mercy 
of that very world. The world, being ruled by a law of which he is igno- 
rant, continuously proves his theories wrong, shakes his convictions, dis- 
mantles his intellectual edifices. 

If it were not so, man would know at every instant that he is as far from 
reality as someone who, staring in the evening at the mist that rises from 
the rivers, would think he could fix it there, and, falling asleep, would 
expect to find it still there in the morning. The wise, on the contrary, know 
very well that the evening mist is just the visible synthesis of the human 
day; having all been spent among ghosts, it ends with the ghost of ghosts, 
namely the mist that obscures the sight and has neither weight nor face. 



Ea 

On the General Doctrine 

of Mantras 



W 



e have often employed the term mantra in the previous pages. From a 
practical point of view; Luce has already implicitly discussed it in reference 
to the "Names of Power" and the "Signatures" (see chapter III). However, 
it is opportune to lay out some theoretical elements, proper to traditional 
Hinduism. 174 An analogous exposition would also be possible from the 
perspective of the Kabbalistic tradition, and would also engender interest- 
ing comparisons. 

In order to understand what a mantra is, it is necessary to adopt the 
perspective that considers all things in function of sound and movement 
Everything in the universe is a vibration; this vibration has the living sense 
of speaking, of expressing the invisible world. It is movement as sounding 
word and revealing Logos. 

However, in the experience of the word we can distinguish three ele- 
ments: the mere sound, or "voice" (vdkshabda = logos); hearing (pratyaya); 
and "meaning/ 1 namely the object evoked by any voice in those who hear. 

If we extend analogically the experience of the wwd known by men, 
and if we properly interpret its elements, the doctrine of mantras seeks to 
give an account of the process of manifestation. From this results a par- 
ticular interpretation of the traditional theory of the three worlds — or, bet- 
ter said, of the three main conditions of being, corresponding to three 
forms of possible experience. We must not forget that Oriental metaphys- 
ics never deals, as modern philosophy does, with "concepts," but rather 
with experiences that it does not invent, but merely expounds upon from 
the basis of the authority of those who have seen (rshi). 

The base experience and the supreme state is the absolute and infinite 



L74. The most complete work on this matter is J. Woodroffe, The Garland of Letters 
{London: Luzac, 1922). The main data presented here are derived from it. 



339 
ON THE GENERAL DOCTRINE OE MANTRAS 

identity (brahman). It is, eternal, without possibility of change, without 
name or form, ungraspable — it simultaneously "proceeds" (prasarati), de- 
termining a logos, and logoi t sound, and sounds; it evolves in the experi- 
ence of a qualified world, with a duality of subject (aham) and object (idam) j 
with different degrees of light, with various beings, both glorious and dark, 
beautiful and not beautiful, worthy and unworthy, subject to generation, 
change, and decay. As such it is shabdabrahman (i.e., brahman in the form 
of Word). It is a Wind that carries the Unmoved, the Soundless, the Inef- 
fable, that which remains what it is as the light of the Great Game, center 
of the Dance, axis of the Wheel 

Thus, as the first state and as the supreme condition we may posit the 
experience of this duality-unity. The Word is first of all a mass of pure sound, 
radiant energy, constituting the so-called vajra-dk&sha, the ether of the "Dia- 
mond-Thunderbolt." The "meaning," or artha, of this primordial "Word/ 
of this formless thunderbolt, is the supreme and hidden brahman. And yet 
the two are one. There is no room for an apprehension, or for pratyaya: here 
expression is immediate revelation — or better, self-revelation — spirit, eter- 
nal sense. Artha and shabda are one and the same. The well-known sacred 
syllable OM corresponds analogically to this primordial sound, wind, sound 
of sounds, which shatters the equilibrium of creative powers. 

The state that hierarchically follows the supreme sound (pdrashabda), 
is the subtle sound (stikshma-shabda) , Here the sonorous block is qualified, 
is pronounced in "letters,' 1 resounds in logoi, chisels moving figures in the 
homogenous mass of radiant ether, and determines "assignments" 
(tanmdtra), A world of "gods" (devatd) awakens: powers of things in forms 
not yet materialized or yet made act, in bodies substantiated by rhythms 
that constitute the subtle sounds of particular gestures vibrating in a space 
that is not yet the physical one, echoing like words in an incorruptible, 
eternal ear. The shabda-brahman, namely Brahman as Word, manifests it- 
self in these living and immaterial powers, which are different modes of 
being that, as p&ra-shabda, are contained in it as in a "whole" (puma). 
Each of them carries a degree, an aspect, a seal of the supreme "meaning": 
the "partial meanings" in them, though they do not yet separate them- 
selves, in a certain sense are distinguished from what in them is properly 
word or sound (shabda). These are, so to speak, the souls, the "spirits," the 



340 
ON THE GENERAL DOCTRINE OF MANTRAS 

Selves of the sounding bodies, or words, in which they are pronounced. 175 
When we talk about mantras (in the proper sense), we allude to these 
"bodies"; thus they allegedly are "Voices," the correlative sense of which is 
not a thing, nor the image of a God, but the God himself, in his form made 
of consciousness (cid-rupim). Here the voice is not separated from the ob- 
ject, nor is this outside of the sound: the mantra is the God, and the per- 
ceptive or expressive actualization (pratyaya) of the mantra directly con- 
stitutes the presence, the being of its God (artha). However, the God is 
the still aspect, the aspect of "silence," identity, form of pure flashing 
(yjotirmayi) that burst out from that act, that nexus of rhythm or motion, 
which constitutes its mantra. 

These articulations of the "hidden Sound" on the subtle plane are the 
Second Mothers, or the incorruptible and generating (m&trka, matrices) 
"Letters." From their combination, variation, and interaction, the doctrine 
says that all things and all beings of the universe are formed. However, not 
as they appear in sensible experience, but as they are in their causes. Such 
are their "Names" — in Western terminology, their signatures (signaturae 
rerum). The Name would be the sound produced by the subtle force that 
generates or constitutes a thing or a being, but not as it echoes in physical 
air, but as it is directly perceived by the spirit in an inner ether, free of the 
restrictions of space and time, under the species of movement-in-itself, of 
pure, "continuous," homogeneous sound, rather than of material vibrations. 
The names and the mantras are called radical or seminal (bija) if they 
represent a given element as synthesis-essence, as a "whole"; they are called 
secondary if they only fix a particular virtue of theirs. For instance, the bijA- 
mantra of Fire is RAM, 176 whereas the "vortex" aspect of Fire is expressed by 
AG, its purifying element by PU, and the consuming aspect by HU or ASH. 



175. It is in reference lo this phase that the symbolism of the divine couple is employed; 
the male god corresponds to the spiritual principle, and his "bride" to his "body of power." 

176. All of the hija-mantra end with the letter M in the nasal form, called candra-bmdu. It 
is a sound made through the nose, without moving the lips; the nose echoes within the 
sound of the initial letter or syllable. Graphically, the candm-bindu. is portrayed as vi>, 
whereby the half-moon represents nddti — the sound, the feminine shahti of the subtle 
plane — and the dot, or bindu, represents the fixity of the supreme plane. Starting from 
the material form, given by the verbal pronunciation of the first letters, the candra-bindu 
indicates the inner process aiming at translating the sound to the other two planes. 



341 
ON THE GENERAL DOCTRINE OF MANTRAS 

From the supreme state we have gone to the causal and subtle one. 177 
From this we pass to the last state, to the material form of sound (sthula- 
shabda). Here the Word assumes the species of the spoken word, which is 
physically audible (vaikhari-shabda); what occurs, then, is the law of dual- 
ity proper to the complete manifestation. The Names and the subtle sounds 
are pronounced and projected into objects and living consciousnesses (jtvo), 
The three elements of a word — meaning, voice, and apprehension — are 
separated and become independent from one another. The artha is no longer 
a meaning or "light," but the object of which the word knows only how to 
evoke the external image through conventional meanings, mental associa- 
tions, memories, The relation proper to the apprehension, to the pratyaya, 
is no longer essential, nor creative: it is no longer the "act" that captures 
the object in itself, in an intellectual transparency. It is based on data of the 
senses (dpta), rather than proceeding from an active and direct intuition of 
the spirit (s&ksh&tkrta). While before the names constituted a Universal 
Language, which conveyed things as they are in themselves through a unique 
and absolute expression, now they are degenerated into the multiplicity of 
accidental and corruptible expressions designating them in various languages. 

This is the material form of the word, which is the only one known to 
man. In his ignorance, he thinks that such a physical form exhausts the 
word; he knows nothing about the subtle form, nor of the causative and 
supreme forms that are asleep in the word itself — as well in physical move- 
ments — and without which the very thing that he knows would not exist 
or only be an incoherent sound. 

In the doctrine discussed here, the very sound of sounds, OM, being 
everywhere, is also found in the body of men as the ultimate hidden depth 
of the force that animates them, gives them form, light, and resolve of the 
wilL This is where we find the magical doctrine (mdya-v&da) of mantras in 
the narrow and practical sense. In short, it leads to a resurrection of the 
uving word, to an awakening of the sound, in order that the "figures" made 
of pure actuality, which correspond to the subtle plane, may finally appear 
denuded of their sensible, corruptible, contingent form. According to a 



177, In this exposition, 1 believe it is useful to include in single unity-correlation the 
subtle plane and the causal plane. Strictly speaking, the partition is quaternary: material 
state, subtle state, causal state (distinct from the subtle one and including 
shabdabrahman), and, finally, absolute transcendence as the supreme state. 



342 
ON THE GENERAL DOCTRINE OF MANTRAS 

symbolical etymology, the term mantra derives from man (manana - to 
think) and tra (trdyate = to preserve). This etymology points to an act of the 
mind in which the word is "preserved" or maintained in its primordial state. 

No human word can, as such, be a mantra. However, due to certain 
occult laws of harmony (candah), certain archaic and sacred sounds are 
like a trace or echo of the mantras and of their artha. The practice of Man- 
tra Yoga aims at awakening, from the material shape (sht&la-rlkpa) of these 
sounds, their subtle form, the syllables of "light" corresponding to them. 

No illusions should, however, be harbored. The texts clearly say that it 
is possible to practice japa (namely to repeat a mantra) a million times, but 
unless it is known, it remains a mere Happing of the lips. The enunciation 
of a mantra is essentially an act of the spirit, in which that moment of 
enlightenment and of inner awareness that arises every time one says, "I 
have understood, 11 is taken to a higher plane and purified from any mate- 
rial residue. It is only at that point that the mantra awakens and "acts." 
The material enunciation becomes a vehicle of a magical or evocatory power 
only on this condition. Thus it is said that it is almost impossible to know 
the enunciation of a mantra unless one first learns it directly from a Master. 

The repetition (japa) must be understood as "repeatedly shaking a sleep- 
ing person, until he wakes up." In some schools the auxiliary mantra IM is 
repeated seven times before and after japa in order to facilitate the fluid- 
ification of the main mantra. This is called mdrd.-bh.anga (destruction of 
sleep). More specific instructions are given in the order of chakra-v&da, 
namely of the doctrine concerning the "power points" (chakras) found in 
the hitman body The body, according to esoteric teaching in general, in- 
cludes all the elements, in its dark depth eluding the ordinary wakeful 
consciousness. At the root of the body's vital force, in its subtle form, lies 
OM itself, which is the substance of all mantras. Thus the mantras of the 
various natural elements echo in particular qualifications of this force within 
the organism. Earth, water, fire, air, ether are sympathetically connected with 
fluid currents (nadi), originating from five "life points," roughly corre- 
sponding to the sacral, prostatic, solar, cardiac, and laryngeal plexi. The 
corresponding bija-mantra are LAM, VAM, RAM, YAM, HAM. The utter- 
ing of one of these btja "touches" the center corresponding to it, activating 
its fluid current. Vice versa, by transferring and fixing the mental fire in 



343 
ON THE GENERAL DOCTRINE OF MANTRAS 

one of these centers as the consciousness attempts to assume the form of the 
mantra, the awakening or the "flowering" (sphota) of the mantra is facilitated. 

What galvanizes the mantra is the spiritual strength of the operator 
(s&dhaka-shakti). However, the virtue of the mantra is not only based on 
that. The mantra includes its own power, which, after joining the s&dhaka- 
shdktU exalts it, multiplies it, and makes it achieve a "leap" to a higher 
plane. Metaphysically speaking, this force of the mantra is not substan- 
tially different from the operator's, since the subtle sound and the material 
sound are not two different things, but two forms or states of the same 
thing. However, this energy in the effort of the operator is awkward, un- 
certain, and limited by the general conditions of individual existence: the 
mantra rectifies it, integrates it, stabilizes it, determining a further current 
of strength and of illumination that connects to the previous one, com- 
pleting the transformation. 

Thus, one text uses the image of a certain quantity of liquid that is rap- 
idly added to that already found in a container, causing it to overflow. In 
another text, the s&dhaka-shakti is compared to fire. Just as air waves, when 
they meet a flame, increase its strength, likewise the energy of the operator, 
when it is hit by the mantra's shakti, grows rapidly and becomes very effica- 
cious. In theory, at the time of the full realization of a mantra, the virtue of 
the individual practitioner is transformed into the virtue of the god presid- 
ing over it: he virtually becomes capable of anything this god is. 

The Names and the mantras are liable to a double experimental verifi- 
cation: a) given a thing, the supersensible, yogic perception of the "sound" 
of the movement of that thing must correspond, approximately and ana- 
logically, to the mantra; b) vice versa, the right utterance of an entirely 
vivified mantra should produce the apparition of that corresponding thing 
or element. 

Thus, if the mantra puts one in contact with the subtle plane, and if the 
latter is the plane of acts that sustain the sensible and material apparitions 
of things, and thus sustain those very things that are believed to be "inani- 
mate," by vibrating a command in a mantra, it will bring about a magical 
realization. This, of course occurs at the risk and peril of the operator, in 
the sense that he must first consider whether he has the necessary strength 
to make the female (£) of the corresponding fluidic vortex (which also 



344 
ON THE GENERAL DOCTRINE OE MANTRAS 

echoes, among other things, in the occult life currents of his organism, 
which now emerge from the depth of the "centers"), while he himself is 
the © before it and the concomitant reactions. This is the condition for the 
success of the operation, in the magical sense- 
In general, in the awakened mantra the presence of the so-called "form 
of light" Qyotirmayt) is developed. The latter is said to be "liberation": as 
we have seen, it stands in relation to the rhythmic body of the mantra itself 
as meaning (artha) stands to the mere letter, word, or sound (shabda). 
These presences do not themselves resound: they are "silences" standing 
in counterpoint to the pattern of subtle sounds. They lead to that which in 
the word is even deeper than qualification. When they are known in this 
manner, all the waves, the syncopes, and the shadows vanish; one then 
achieves the experience of vajra-dk&sha, the naked homogeneous ether of 
a word that is diamond-thunderbolt, and whose sign is O. The "empti- 
ness" (shunyatd) enclosed in the circle indicates something in relation to 
which this vajra state stands like a sound, corporeity, and incorporeity. It is 
Brahman, the supreme state. 

From the point of view of mantra-vdda we may say: that which is at the 
base of things and commonly called "reality" is but a symbol. Man moves 
among symbols, and is himself a symbol, including his form, his speech, 
everything that he does. 

In the sensible world, man find himself confronted by an alphabet or a 
system of signs, of which, due to a mysterious amnesia, he is ignorant both 
of the pronunciation and the meaning. Thus even its symbolic meaning 
eludes him. In the subtle world, it is the "state of pronunciation" that 
awakens in one's consciousness: from the sign emerges the memory of the 
word, of the sound — one no longer perceives forms and material bodies, 
but rather rhythms and gestures. Finally, the causal world (karana: the 
"intellectual world," the kog|lioc; vorjroq of neo-Platonism, the Sophar of 
the Kabbalah) is the state of the sound that transcends itself and is per- 
ceived as a "meaning." The three worlds are in reality one world: they are 
different "perceptive faculties" of an identity, or degrees of light in the 
same landscape. The Self knows one or the other, depending on its atti- 
tude, and on the degree of light and inner awakening that it can bring to 
life in itself. 



345 
ON THE GENERAL DOCTRINE OF MANTRAS 

He who succeeds in mastering the "meaning" of things has the key to 
high magic. It all consists in achieving a state of intelligence , of signifi- 
cance before things. He who has comprehended a thing will also be able to 
utter it. This utterance is to "resolve" it as a thing and to virtually establish 
a magical relationship with it. Then the human word resurrects as Logos, 
or as a living word. Then words become virtue and truth. The mantras are 
mysterious flashes of this resurrection that are mysteriously trapped and 
dormant inside some archaic, hieratic, and primordial voices. 



Alba 

De Naturae Sensu 

(The Sense of Nature) 



I 



t is a long journey before one attains awakening, before one's conscious- 
ness gradually realizes, grabs, and fixes the more or less frequent hints and 
the sudden, unexpected echoes, through the use of memory. The range of 
these hints and echoes is various and infinite, ever new and full of wonder. 
1 am talking about events in our ordinary life, things that surround us and 
occasion a series of thoughts and inner experiences, mysterious voices 
that arise from the depth of one's being and emerge to the conscious level. 
Then one experiences them as the fluttering of wings that attempt to take 
off toward the light- 
There are two very wide fields that offer an inexhaustible harvest of 
such echoes: our own soul, and nature. 

Let us look around ourselves: the world is mans book, provided he is 
able to see and hear the voices of things and feel the relationship existing 
between his life and theirs. For there is life in plants, in water, in the wind, 
in fire, in the stars, in the thousands of visible and invisible beings that are 
everywhere. There is life and spirit, too, in what we do not see but which 
surrounds us: Hades, the invisible. 

Look at the earth: nature is the fertile mother, inexhaustible, even in 
the most elementary form of life, even in mud. The wind has blown seeds 
on rooftops, among the ruins of an ancient tower. These seeds find a bit of 
earth between a couple of stones and establish a way of life: soon a tuft of 
grass is born and lives on, 

The earth, this immense quantity of matter that is transformed, spins 
around its axis, crumbles and reassembles, producing countless lives 
through countless and continuous transformations: it is none other than 
the symbol of our own body and our own flesh. This can be easily be 
understood by realizing the analogy between our physical life and nature, 
or between our body and the life of a tree, for example, 



349 
DE NATURAE 5EN5V 

Observe some trees that have only a part of their roots in the earth, 
while most of the roots lie exposed, apparently lacking nourishment, and 
yet are alive thanks to the vital juices coming from the depths of the earth — 
then feel that in those naked roots and the rough trunk of the tree flows a 
vital lymph similar to that which feeds our bodies. Then vegetative life 
will no longer be a dead and meaningless notion. Bend down to observe a 
fragile green leaf, and feel with your fingers its thin fibers; smell the lus- 
cious smell of a rose, conscious that tomorrow all that may be left of iE is 
the naked stem surrounded by scattered petals: and yet for a short time 
nature has smiled in the flower, happy to grow under the sun, transmitting 
to you her joy of a fertile mother, never tired, always inexhaustible. In the 
evening, some trees emanate an acute fragrance; you may not see them, 
but their smell is like a clarion call: become aware of that voice, the mute 
language of friendly beings, and feel the closeness of the great shadows in 
the shadow, living in their stillness in closer contact with the earth. The 
trees also communicate the impression of this contact with earth, vibrat- 
ing in the breath of the leaves. The snow, covering everything with ils 
whiteness, conveys a sense, of sadness similar to that which emanates from 
the naked and barren trees during winter, because at that time we feel 
nature shut off in lethargy, and isolated in her concentration. 

Observe the continuous flowing of a river; feel the water flowing in the 
earth, like blood in the veins — like the warmth of the sun giving light and 
life; like the warmth of the body. Or, on the shore of a lake, staring at the 
water, feel a living and real something, rising from the lake and getting 
closer. It is not necessary to have a vision or to evoke the Genius; it suffices 
to understand how the body of waters, which we can study from a chemi- 
cal and scientific point of view, is the manifestation of real, yet invisible, 
spiritual intelligences. 

The earth, the air, fire, and all the elements are constantly in our sight, 
in their various manifestations, and yet we fail to understand them. We 
seldom pay attention to air; we do not think about it, and we do not feel its 
fluid essence surrounding and penetrating all things. 

In order to understand the deep meaning of the air, pick an evening, 
during spring, and try to focus your perception on the contrasts. When 
you walk, surrounded by the deafening murmur of a street enclosed be- 
tween tall buildings, feel the multiform crowd swarming about, trapped in 



350 
DE NATURAE SENSU 

the fog of everyday concerns, afflicted by physical and moral ailments, as 
the evening slowly descends on the city, the first lights are being lit and the 
blue sky is still bright, A sudden feeling, almost a sense of discomfort, 
penetrates us, accompanied by a yearning for liberation. Then realize in 
one's being the sense of the earth's heaviness, contrasting with the impal- 
pable air. Lastly, proceed to solitude and to meditation, 

A wave of vivifying purity pervades the soul before the light and the 
warmth of a flame; a prayer is more fervent and noble if performed by 
candlelight. Today we have almost lost the possibility of being near fire; 
we no longer have fireplaces lit by great burning logs, but the electrical 
current, which suddenly dissipates the faint crepuscular light. 

Feel the sun, in a hot summer, as if you had become a lamp shining with 
a glowing light; the Sun is me, its light and warmth are in me — think this as 
you abandon yourself to the feeling of luminous joy, as you experience your 
body to be light and carried upward; feel the birth in you of adoration for the 
bright star, the Light, and recall the ancient cult of the fire-worshipers. 

The. wholly spiritual experience of light, of the sun in us, expresses the 
desire to ascend, while the feeling of physical well-being that comes from 
the sun's warmth causes an elan of exaltation, of expansion of the physical life. 

We all have the possibility, latent or developed in varying degrees, to 
hear these voices coming to us from things, from nature, from within our- 
selves. These voices come to us through sensations and impressions that 
we did not create or will; they come when we least think of them, at a time 
of mental relaxation or at a time of inner peace. They are always preceded 
by an arcane sense of wonder mixed with anticipation, as our glance shifts 
to a plant, to a tree, or to a landscape. The will does not operate directly on 
them; the will and even the thirst for knowledge have only the task of 
organizing the experiences and developing them in a harmonious way, 
lifting them onto planes of realization and further adaptations. 

Thus, having begun to know what vital force, similar to ours, is in every- 
thing that surrounds us, from a grass blade to an invisible atom, from the drop 
of dew to the luminous energy of fire, it is easy to come to realize the deep 
meaning of all tilings; that which is visible and real to us is nothing but the 
shadow cast by that which exists equally, but invisibly The two planes are 
connected by symbols. That which is outside of us is in us under a different 
aspect. To feel in harmony with the life of things is the realization of this law 



351 
DE NATURAE SENSU 

The Earth is our flesh; Water is the purifying strength that it needs; Air 
is what is between Heaven and Earth , body and spirit. The spirit is the Fire 
that vivifies and enlightens everything, dispersing the shadows of matter, 
aiming upward. 

Not only our physical existence is symbolized in nature, but we find in 
its various aspects deep analogies with our states of mind. We have the 
calm, the melancholy, and the violence of the sea; the ephemeral nature of 
grass; the aridity and fertility of the countryside; the fantastic whirling of 
the wind. In the diamond light of the stars, so far away from the earth, we 
have the isolation that sometimes is in us, in the abysmal and inaccessible 
depth of the Self. 

In nature we constantly and clearly see the manifestation of the law of 
duality and of equilibrium that emerges from the ongoing contrasts of 
strength and weakness, of plus and minus. Among the cyclones, the storms, 
and the infinite grace of a small flower; mosses, frail grasses, and inviolate 
rocky mountains that seem to heave their heavy mass toward higher spheres 
with a tenacious effort, the refuge of eagles and butterflies. 

Man appears as a creative, violent, and absolute force; woman as a com- 
prehensive, receptive capacity that develops and reflects this force. 

The sun and the wind: strength and violence. 

The earth and green pastures: absorption and fertility. 




For a gradual development of the sense of nature, it is necessary first to try 
to reverberate its various voices in us, following their unfolding in the 
annual cycle, from its blossoming in the spring, to its maturity and full- 
ness in the summer, to its decline and its brief and apparent lethargy in the 
winter, which is profound concentration and preparation. Thus, begin to 
observe the environment in which you live. 

Fvery object has, in its form, a particular imprint that bespeaks its deep- 
est meaning and can cause an endless development of ideas, impressions, 
inner experiences that vary from individual to individual, depending on 
their particular attitudes. 

Notice, for instance, that we do not perceive the color, but the form of 
some colored objects; a first idea of formless color may be suggested by the 



352 

DE NATURAE SENSV 

fluttering of colored veils, even though the image is still very inadequate 
to convey the transcendent reality of color. 

It is helpful to remember how much the spectrum of colors affects the 
spirit: the sense of rest that helps one concentrate may be induced by light 
shades of blue and green, not by red or white. There are various aspects of 
landscapes in different seasons and regions: an icy lunar landscape, a vast 
land, a boundless desert do not occasion the same feelings as a green val- 
ley during spring, or fields rich with harvest, or placid mountain lakes. 
The temperament of the inhabitants of a region varies with the region it- 
self: poets often feel certain landscapes, which are actually inner states of 
being, and translate them in their poems. 

In many cases, people's physical appearance, their profile, or smiles 
give away their nature, virtues, and vices. When we observe our own physi- 
cal appearance in a mirror for a long time, we may be amazed that through 
this particular face and body we know ourselves and are known to others. 
The hand has a deep expression, just like the eyes, and it can reveal whether 
a person is spiritually close to us or not. Some people have the possibility 
of deeply knowing another person only after a few instants or hours of 
conversation. Then something wonderful and simple may occur: in a crowd, 
somewhere, a person suddenly feels somebody else's essence, who natu- 
rally is totally unaware of this at the time; the feeling one has in such a 
circumstance is as spontaneous as it is real. The human voice may also 
reveal much: one is happy to listen to a song in which a voice displays its 
various tones and inflections; if the song or voice is our own, we may 
experience a division, as one person speaks and acts and the other listens. 
This does not usually occur, because when we speak we follow our own 
line of thought, without paying attention to our voice. 

In some privileged spiritual occasions, in perfect solitude, invisible lives 
beyond that of the human reveal themselves. The spirit may take notice of 
them, but not always, nor is everyone able to. Sometimes, as we are alone 
in a room reading or writing, all of a sudden we may sense we are no 
longer alone. Sometimes the presence of the approaching entity is so clearly 
perceived that we feel compelled to look in a direction, where we feel an 
invisible somebody watching us. Sometimes we may feel like bowing, as we 
realize we are in the presence of a higher being; then wonder is followed 
by a sense of peace, profound inner peace, and stronger resolution. The 



353 

DE NATURAE 5ENSU 

spirit appears to be elevated, pushed forward by the fluttering of invisible 
wings. We feel these presences suddenly, unwillingly, though they are al- 
most always preceded by a period of great purity of life, both inner and 
outer. 

Sometimes one may even hear one's name being called, both when one 
is awake and asleep. Who is calling? 

We may also experience the presence of different beings from the ones 
I have mentioned: these beings are very close to man, and they can com- 
municate to him sudden fears, or different and weird impressions. Some- 
times we may feel big laughing mouths around us, in a frightful attitude of 
mockery, belonging to beings that are not invisible, but are not perceived 
through the physical eye. 

The invisible world may at times communicate with us as a wave of 
sudden terror, the depths of the abyss yawning under our feet; the icy fear 
of darkness; the sense of loneliness in a deserted place; the horror of sud- 
den awful visions; these are all manifestations of the world of Fear, exist- 
ing beyond the limits of human consciousness. At those times, either the 
spirit is so strong as to remain unshaken, strong, dissipating all fears, or 
Fear itself, as a fire fed by a mighty wind, crashes onto a person with vari- 
ous serious consequences. 

Sleep is but a break, a shadow between the light of falling asleep and of 
rising up. One wakes up rested in the body, but often with the feeling of 
having been separated from life for hours, without remembering a thing, 
except for the chaotic images of one's dreams. At other times, we reawaken 
serene, feeling different; in those cases we can say that we have not slept at 
all, because as we stayed with our eyes closed, a life was in us. We have two 
lives that take us away from the ordinary state of wakefulness: in the first 
life, the body rests and the spirit, trapped in matter, rests. In that case, one 
experiences falling asleep as a sense of abandonment, or of a descent into 
nothingness. The second life, as the body sleeps, carries the spirit farther, 
toward a light, through infinite spaces; then the body has a sense of restful 
freshness, despite any previous sense of physical exhaustion. It is in this 
state of consciousness, which is not wakefulness, nor sleep in the ordinary 
sense of the word, that various visions appear. They may be bright shapes, 
shining with untold beauty or horrible monsters, or ordinary human shapes, 
who are bent on performing strange tasks and who suddenly stop to stare 



354 

DE NATURAE SENSU 

at us, giving us an eerie feeling that startles us. Thus, until we reach a 
certain harmony through the rhythm of Ritual, we will have mainly cha- 
otic and disconnected visions, which gradually coordinate and arrange 
themselves in visible manifestations of a living and lucid symbolism. Their 
deep meaning, shining forth, explains many things and many inexplicable 
mysteries of the human mind. 

In such zones the weaker spirit struggles, passes vertiginously from one 
state to another, falls into bottomless abysses of darkness, only to return 
by long, tortuous paths to the light that penetrates it and encloses it in 
itself, whereupon the whole spirit is transformed into a luminous body. 

In some rare instances, people who are still alive and who are close to us 
through spiritual affinities may appear to us under a different guise. More 
ordinarily we perceive a doubling: it appears as a vision of ourselves re- 
flected in a mirror or in a thin sheet of glass. Sometimes the vision is very 
clear and the form is completely exteriorized. Sometimes the face assumes a 
highly spiritual countenance; at times our double stares at us with wide open 
eyes. At that moment our inner core is pervaded by an icy shudder. At other 
times visions and symbols are explained to us by the invisible Unknown, 
which guides us and talks to us. By going further, one realizes that visions 
and symbols appear as a harmonious development, with an incredible con- 
nection between them, often in relation with events of one's past or future 
life. There are also many bright, external, and inner perceptions. Countless 
sparks, suffused light, luminous globes, until one attains the view of the 
astral eye, which is large and bright red — when staring at it, one loses en- 
tirely the perception of being a separate entity, and comes to see and feel the 
universe within oneself, beyond the limits of time, space, and things. 

Among the most noteworthy signs are the mysterious voices that arise 
from the deep, at times of distraction, or when we least expect them, as we 
converse or work. From one's deepest depth of being sudden flashes occur, 
shedding light on a world once known but long since forgotten. They arise 
as words and voices whose meaning we do not understand, but whose 
sound seems to make us happier and better people. The soul listens to this 
distant music, becoming intoxicated with it, as the mind hopelessly chases 
questions with no answers, within the inviolable limits that only the spirit 
can transcend. 

When listening to these voices, one sometimes wishes to create an ab- 



355 

DE NATURA E SENSU 

solute inner silence, to even still the hearts beats, so that the elusive har- 
monies of the cosmic spheres may be perceived. One may even listen to 
the sound of one's own heart. 

Sometimes when no sounds are perceived, one hears in the surround- 
ing silence a Silence; then the heart shudders as if its beating were due to 
the sounds in the air. These are brief moments: the silence that emerged 
from the deep has for a brief time detached us from life: once every exter- 
nal sound and every thought has ceased, we sense the solitude and the 
freedom at the center of the universe. Then, as we come back into our- 
selves, we shudder as we feel the Rowing of time and of the wave of life. It 
is a heartbeat of eternal life in contrast to our mortal life. 

Sometimes we may feel as fluid as a wave: we experience fixations of 
thought, during which something sweet and tenuous rises from deep within, 
emerging at the surface of our sensibility. What we experience then is similar 
to the sensation of one who, lying on the water, abandons oneself, slowly 
feeling its coolness. 

Sometimes the sense of detachment is sharper: one feels as if flying 
through infinitely open spaces, without any other sensation but of ascend- 
ing, being suspended in the air, completely free from any bodily bond — a 
feeling of relief, like a long sigh following an oppressive situation. Then 
one's being, having left behind the bonds that tie it to the earth, is free in 
its own kingdom, in the realm of the spirit. Then the state of luminous joy 
pervading the soul is indescribable. 

Haec ad magicam my stent portam apericndam doves. (These are the keys 
for opening the magic door of the mystery.) 

At times we feel not living but dreaming, as if the very essence of life 
were destroyed in us, while the distant thought watches us live, observing 
us as if we were somebody else. This often happens in sudden hursts of 
yearning for liberation, which is found by inwardly isolating oneself. But 
one needs to be capable of this inner act; otherwise, due to the aggravating 
contrasts between real life and this sense of dreams, a state of tension and 
acute suffering sets in. We recall the deep, unexplainable sadness of ado- 
lescence, when, at the end of physical development, the spirit seems to 
awaken: then feelings of skepticism or mysticism ensue. These are real 
tests that lead to the victory of the spirit if the latter knows to have faith in 
a faceless and nameless Light, which it establishes within itself. 



356 

DE NATURAE SENSU 

In general, we are well aware of living and existing, but not of being. We 
can affirm this only when we really feel a flame of the sacred Cosmos 
ignite within us; then we shall feel like a luminous, bright spot in the 
Universe. Only then will we safely overcome the spiritual crises that will 
unavoidably arise in us, similar to waves chasing other waves, wider and 
taller, against which an increasingly stronger resistance must be erected, 
lest we be submerged by them. The Ghosts of the dark sense of being lost, 
of the soundless Void, of icy Isolation, and of the total absence of value, 
will bar our path. They will appear frightening and unexpected, arising all 
of a sudden without a logical connection with the events of everyday life, 
sneaking in between joy and pain. We need to create a strength in our- 
selves that is invincible by virtue of itself; then every ghost will vanish as 
soon as it is formed. 

This strength consists in the constant determination to remain calm 
and steady, to be able to dismiss every shadow of sad or evil thought pro- 
jected by the denser element; in being able to master our own and other 
people's nervous waves; in having been able to create in us a serenity that 
sometimes we can derive from solitude, from the countryside, or from our 
inner world. Overjoy and suffering, over the alternating of good and evil, 
the unconquered spirit must shine, as over the flow of human generations, 
ever unchanging and cold, shines the light of the stars. 

In this state of spiritual calm countless calls will issue forth from na- 
ture, from our inner world: they are voices, impressions, presences, vi- 
sions, and states of mind that can manifest themselves in different degrees 
of clarity to various individuals over any period of life. These at first ob- 
scure messages, which are eventually deciphered by the spirit, reveal to us 
a new, real world existing around us and in us. This knowledge will give us 
a double life, whose continuous and wonderful becoming will put us in 
contact with other planes of existence. 

These calls, which are almost always sporadic and chaotic until the Rite 
has harmonized them with its rhythm, reach us so that we may awaken 
spiritually, no longer slaves, but masters of the flesh: so that we may become 
fully aware that the spirit that animates us is a spark of the great Fire that 
lives in the universe and whose igneous nature constantly aims upward. 



Leo 



Aphorisms 



T h 



he following aphorisms are compiled according to the intention I ex- 
pressed in my previous essay. Each of them is meant as a theme of medita- 
tion. Persisting in this meditation, they will produce results in the form of 
knowledge. They are derived from the content of my previous writings, and 
at the same time will help the reader to understand those at a deeper level. 

The certainty of the unreality of the limits of our bodies and of our 
inner activity is the first step toward the expansion of consciousness. 




To extend the sense of external reality to the most subtle changes of 
consciousness helps to sharpen the inner activity. 




The feeling of pow T er must be projected in a thrust toward the future, 
To feel it in the present is to come to a halt. 




Man perpetuates himself in the cosmos, and the cosmos in man. It is 
not possible to really feel oneself unless one feels extended outside. It is 
not possible to spiritually penetrate the world without starting from the 
center of our being and continuing from there toward the world. 




Man synthesizes in himself that which in the world has unfolded in 
time. The synthesis of the events assembles in him and becomes an actual 
event in his conscience — thus he overcomes the limitation of time. 



358 
APHORISMS 




Man has perennial relationships with the world; at the bottom of his 
being he can find the threads that prove to him the continuity of these 
relationships and the spiritual reality of that which surrounds him. 




The human entity is also a cosmic entity; by abstracting from the sen- 
sible world and by maintaining the fullness of consciousness, through si- 
lence it may attain the knowledge of the cosmic essence. 




A cosmic experience is the realization of the sense of duration of one's 
being in a eoparticipation in the cosmic becoming sub specie aeternitatis 
(from the viewpoint of eternity). 




In everything that moves, sprouts, grows, changes, and dies, we need 
to detect the presence of an invisible force. No event of nature begins or 
ends due to causes intrinsic in nature itself. 




In the contemplation of nature, the sense of beauty consists in having a 
presentiment conjoined with wonderment and being unaware; it will be 
completed later on through knowledge. 




Rhythm is a universal law. The sense of rhythm in man and in the world, 
and their harmonization, produces an awakening of consciousness and 
reveals the occult in life. 



359 
APHORISMS 




It is not possible to approach the occult in a detached way; the entire 
soul must be ready to vibrate, admire, and rejoice. Only in fullness can 
knowledge flourish. 




The infinite and the sense of development must become qualities that are 
intrinsic in our consciousness: it is not possible to approach the world with- 
out this living sense in us. Without this sense of growth, of ascending move- 
ment, of rhythm, we remain behind in respect to our problem. The revela- 
tion of the invisible may be received only by eternal beings; those who feel 
themselves as having a beginning and an end will never be able to know. 




Our bodies and our brains are "poor leaders" in respect to spiritual 
experiences. We must realize their obstructive quality and conquer it with 
an inner act. When the brain understands, it captures and intercepts that 
which appears to it and prevents it from entering into communication 
with the subtle centers; only that which is repeated and given a rhythm 
may shift to the spiritual, supercerebral consciousness. 




The sense of freedom in the body is relative and illusory: it is not pos- 
sible to experience freedom other than in a consciousness that forgets the 
body, that does not feel the body; 




The imagination is not — in our field — autosuggestion. To imagine is to 
create. When one is able to foresee or to capture a state of consciousness and 
to fix it in the imagination, one has the first step of realization: imagination 
and reality meet each other and coincide in the centers of occult knowledge. 



360 
APHORISMS 




The organs of the physical body have a physiological function that is 
partially accessible to scientific investigation — and a function of relation- 
ship with a subtle body the vehicle of life. Through the latter comes another 
order of relationships with a third body of a higher nature. These ways are 
permeated by the sensory perception and by the motoric exernalization of 
impulses. Normal consciousness gives and receives only that which the 
brain can transmit. Spiritual activity avoids the brain and travels through 
other organs, in which the consciousness of normal man cannot yet estab- 
lish itself. 




When in an ordinary person the consciousness of the tired brain shifts 
into other organs, it becomes obscured and sleep is produced. m Simulta- 
neously the polarity of the body of life (the subtle body) and of the spiri- 
tual body changes. 




The initiate can retain consciousness during the shift from the brain to 
another organ: then he becomes conscious of supersensible worlds that 
ordinary people see only in dreams. If he succeeds in maintaining the po- 
larity of bodies and preventing the detachment, he has a vision of those 
worlds in the waking state. 




The repair of the forces during sleep is due not only to "rest" but also to 
two other factors: the first is the ceasing of the tension of waking con- 
sciousness before the material world. The other is the contact with occult 



1 73. This is why many people, when first beginning to experiment with preliminary 
initiatic techniques, succumb to a sense of sleepiness and evasion, which is induced by 
their consciousness. Their consciousness lags behind in respect to the shift of plane 
already mentioned. There are also those who, having misunderstood the whole thing, 
give up and do not go any further. 



361 
APHORISMS 



creative forces, with which we enter into relationship during sleep. They 
are the forces that have organized our material body and that alone are 
capable of keeping it together and of remedying its losses. 




On the initiatic path, great mysteries are accompanied by small truths 
or by simple techniques of inner refinement that can lead one far. 

Many people have the possibility of acquiring spiritual knowledge and 
yet do not realize it because they are looking for sensational methods, far 
removed from their daily activity. With what we have communicated so far 
in this book, one can make good progress toward esoteric realization. It is 
a matter of using patience, perseverance, and acute observation. Many 
people are very close to revelations capable of transforming them deep 
inside, and yet do not realize it, since they look far away for sensational 
phantasms. 




Spiritual consciousness is perennial, continuous, and always active: it 
is necessary to feel the failure of consciousness that occurs during sleep as 
a pause due to a temporary limitation. 




Every human act must be a preparation or an approach toward a higher 
consciousness: this is the basis on which a man must organize his normal life. 




Man is a composite: of a material body that he sees, feels, perceives; of 
a vital body that holds it together; of a subtle body through which he sees, 
feels, perceives; of a spiritual essence that is the center of his entire being. 
One must remember this composite whenever one says "L" 



Pietro Negri 

Adventures and 
Misadventures in Ma&ic 



T 



hose who take the time to read ancient and modern magical literature 
will soon realize that it contains a vast collection of experiences and feats, 
some of which were brilliantly successful, while others were total failures. 
Judging from the accounts of these experiences, one might be tempted to 
compare magicians to hunters and mountain climbers who, when recall- 
ing their adventures, always triumph over every animal or peak. The nar- 
rator never fails to enumerate and magnify the obstacles that arise and the 
perils that threaten the brave adventurer or experimenter, but all this is 
usually delivered as a salutory warning and instruction for the benefit of the 
neophyte reader; and whether or not the narrator himself appears to have 
taken them into consideration, everything tends toward a self-exaltation 
of the great skill and mastery of the experienced magus, who, mirablle visu 
(marvelous to behold), plunges into a jungle of difficulties as safely and 
triumphantly as the salamander per ignes (through fire) . 

This is why our readers may enjoy for a change, the following truthful 
and modest account of a fiasco incurred by a friend of ours. We have not 
added or omitted anything from his story. 

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A MAGICAL INVOCATION PERFORMED 
IN ROME ON THE DAY OF THE SPRING EQUINOX, 1927 

That night, unlike the Prince de Conde on the eve of the battle of Rocroy> 
1 hardly slept. Even though 1 had set the alarm clock for 3 a.m., I did not 
place much trust in that bundle of springs and wheels, knowing full well 
from personal experience that the clock had occasionally missed the ap- 
pointed hour, only to ring relentlessly twelve hours later. Thus, after two 
hours of sleep, which was often interrupted to check the time, I suddenly 
woke up before the alarm went off. I must say that the alarm went off at 



363 
ADVENTURES AND MISADVENTURES IN MAGIC 

the right time, with relative satisfaction on my part and, no doubt, to the 
great delight of the people sleeping next door. Not that my neighbors 
really deserved much consideration, I had begun the operations during 
the last full moon, and even though 1 did not say anything about it, the 
neighbors had sensed that something funny was going on and were deter- 
mined to set obstacles in my path. Not only did they sense, but they must 
have really smelled the various perfumes that, despite my precautions, 
were coming out of my room during the suffumigations of the ritual op- 
erations; especially the suffumigation of sulfur, which had caused the vul- 
gar crowd to complain. One evening, as they peeked through the keyhole 
that 1 had forgotten to cover, they saw a freak or lunatic dressed in a white 
mantle, standing in the middle of a thick cloud of dark smoke, doing and 
saying weird things. They became increasingly alarmed when the lunatic 
started to leave his apartment every 7 night around 3 a.m., and come back to 
sleep around 6 or 7. 

When the infernal racket of the alarm clock had at last subsided, I be- 
came absorbed in the usual ritual operations that I do not need to describe 
here. When I was done with them, and after performing a ritual ablution, 
1 drank a quick cup of coffee, changed my clothes, and left for the place 1 
had chosen and set up for the invocation. Considering what kind of neigh- 
bors 1 had, it was out of the question to continue to perform rituals in my 
own room. How could 1 have explained and justified to them the eventual 
and noticeable phenomena, such as the movement of objects, noises, voices, 
and conversations? And how could I have continued the enterprise for days 
and weeks? It was far better to take a twenty-minute walk and to reach our 
underground place where 1 was sure nobody would see, hear, or disturb me. 

To be honest, the entrance to my hidden place was none too comfort- 
able: 1 had to crawl on my belly through a narrow passage excavated un- 
derneath an ancient wall three meters thick. Then 1 had to go through a 
series of immense, tall, and lonely underground rooms. A deep darkness 
and solemn silence lingered in there, even during the daylight hours. Right 
at the end, in the middle of a vast room, descending a slope for a few 
meters, one entered a wide crypt, about fifteen meters long and over two 
meters high, doubly isolated from the outside, perfectly dark and silent, 
with no other openings except the entrance. 



364 
ADVENTURES AND MISADVENTURES IN MAGIC 

The night before I had laid out everything I needed at the end of the 
crypt; the lamp, filled with pure olive oil, was already hanging from the 
ceiling; the brazier; the coals; the sword. I had also marked on the ground 
the spots where the magical characters needed to be drawn. The crypt did 
not have a door, but that was no problem since nobody knew about the 
existence of this place. And even if an unfortunate visitor found it, crawled 
through the tunnel, and made it all the way to the vast hall containing the 
entrance to the crypt, he would certainly have stopped there when he saw 
the reflection of the mysterious brightness shining into the darkness from 
the magical lamp. Even 1 found the ghostlike light unnerving, though I 
knew where it came from. And who, having dared to look inside, would 
have come in at the sight of a white phantasm, standing in a cloud of 
smoke, wielding a sword? 

The night before 1 had prepared everything I needed to take with me; 
the key to the cellar, a flashlight, matches, a white linen robe, the ritual 
perfumes, and so on. I put in my pockets as many things as 1 could and 
made a bundle of the rest: then I left. The night was cool and peaceful. 
Once in a while the moon would be visible through the narrow and de- 
serted streets. Due to a rare and favorable coincidence, the full moon had 
occurred three days ago (the preliminary operations required three days); 
thus I could begin my invocation right as the sun entered the first degree 
of Aries, and end it on the first full moon of spring, which this year coin- 
cided with Easter Sunday, 

I walked briskly to overcome the chill of the night and to avoid wasting 
any time, since the operation had to commence before dawn. Rome was 
very quiet: only the noise of a few cars and the occasional night tram broke 
the silence that loomed over the streets, the Forum, and the mighty ruins 
of Rome, Again, the fewer people I ran into, the better. After all, walking 
around the streets of Rome at 3 a.m. by moonlight, with a suspicious bundle 
under my arm, could be very conspicuous. The thought of running into a 
police patrol made me apprehensive, especially because I had inadvert- 
ently left my identity card at home. Imagine! What could 1 have possibly 
said to explain my whereabouts at this hour, and this bundle of peculiar 
objects? Because of this I was walking in a hurry: there was just one more 
square to cross, a narrow alley round a corner, and wham! ..,1 bumped 



365 
ADVENTURES AND MISADVENTURES IN MAGIC 

into two policemen and an officer. Oh well! Luckily, my old habit of self- 
control kicked in automatically: I did not startle, and did not draw their 
attention to me. I thought for sure that they would not detain me and 
question me: 1 thought it, willed it, and so it happened. 

Two minutes later I was in the passage; the wretched obstacles were 
now all behind me, or so 1 thought. 

The lamp, brazier, sword, and charcoal were all neatly arranged. It was 
not cold down there, but the humidity was bone chilling. The matches I 
had left there the night before were useless: thank goodness 1 had another 
box with me. Even the wicks of the magical lamp were damp, and I had a 
hard time getting them lit. However, once I lit them up, the three flames 
worked perfectly. There was no draft to agitate them, and so they cast a 
clear, warm, and diffuse light. 

After lighting the lamp, 1 turned to the brazier. I took it outside the 
crypt, so as to more easily ignite the charcoal by the light of two candles. 
But I realized that the coals had become so damp that I could not ignite 
them. After blowing on the flame with bellows and lungs, the darn coal 
finally lit up; now I only had to keep it burning. In the meantime more 
time had elapsed than I had calculated. 

1 changed quickly and, donning the linen robe, walked down into the 
crypt, holding the brazier and being careful to keep it going, 1 took the ritual 
perfumes and poured a handful on the coals; suddenly a thick and odorous 
smoke arose, yet not strong enough to hide the light of the lamp that contin- 
ued to burn calmly. And as the perfume continued to spread around the 
crypt, 1 took a piece of coal and drew with it the magical characters of the 
ritual at the four cardinal points, and then, still using the coal, made the sign 
of the operation in the middle of them, I placed the brazier on this middle 
point, as a thin smoke continued to rise from it. Here I was; all 1 needed to 
do was to add a little more perfume to the fire and begin the invocation. 

I began to concentrate and all of a sudden, my mind, which until then 
had been absorbed in the various details and material difficulties I have 
described, clearly realized what I was trying to do. I did not fear or hesi- 
tate; and yet I wondered whether it was not too bold on my part to raise 
my still earthbound gaze to the heavens, to such high powers of the solar 
hierarchy. Certainly the daring was gTeat, but this was one more reason to 



366 
ADVENTURES AND MISADVENTURES IN MAGIC 

act in a resolute and decisive way . . . and right away too, since this dam 
coal was giving me a hard time. If the coal stopped burning, good-bye 
smoke and good-bye invocation; I would not have time to light it again, 
and, worse yet, I could not change the order of operations. 1 bent over it 
and blew on it with all my strength; finally the Gods be praised, the fire 
started again and emanated light and heat. 

1 threw another handful of perfume on the fire; held the sword as pre- 
scribed by the ritual; put on my glasses; took with the left hand a scroll 
previously prepared so that I could unfold it using only one hand, and 
started reading the long invocation from it. I turned eastward, pointed the 
sword in direction of the sign of the operation, and, fully aware of my 
actions, began slowly and firmly to read: "O most high power of all powers 
. . ."" I was happy to notice that the light of the lamp allowed me to read the 
words of the invocation and that everything was going as planned. But 
what was happening now? What was this wind? Why did it blow just now, 
shaking the flame of the lamp, disturbing the reading? Now what? I could 
no longer see. By all the Olympian Gods! My glasses fogged up! I had 
sweated profusely thanks to the darn coal, and now, because of my perspi- 
ration and all the humidity in the air, tiny beads of water began to form on 
my lenses; the physical explanation of the phenomenon was all too clear, 
but — 1 could no longer see ... I should have taken my glasses off and 
wiped them clean, but in order to do that I would have had to interrupt the 
operation. 1 only have two hands. In one hand I was holding the sword 
and I could not change its direction. With the other hand I was holding 
the scroll. Worse yet, how could I interrupt the ritual halfway through, 
with such forces already unleashed? I noticed how the wind was lifting the 
smoke and shaking the flame. By all the living Gods! The lamp almost 
went out. 

In a matter of seconds, due to a minor difficulty, the events were turn- 
ing sour. The good Socrates used to say that the eyes of the soul begin to 
see clearly when the eyes of the body begin to lose sight. A consoling 
thought, but it would have been better yet if the lenses had not fogged up. 
I did not like the way things were turning out. All of a sudden 1 felt dizzy, 
sick. Be careful! I said to myself. Be calm and pay attention! I began to 
shiver — could it be with fear? Suddenly I became afraid of fear itself, and 



367 
ADVENTURES AND MISADVENTURES IN MAGIC 

not being able to restrain it. I imagined the consequences and saw myself 
stretched out dead on the floor . , . and promptly reacted. 1 came back to 
my senses and with a sudden fierce resolution I resolved to go on to the 
end, no matter what. In the meantime some of the mist on my glasses 
started to dissipate, Once I started to recite the invocations, my memory 
came to my assistance and I was able to finish, though with some diffi- 
culty However, in the struggle against the pitiful, unforeseen material dif- 
ficulties and with the complications they had caused, I was not able to 
adequately concentrate my spiritual energies: and maybe this was the rea- 
son that the invocation did not attain the results 1 was hoping for. 

By the time I returned home at 6 a.m., I was thoroughly exhausted. And 
1 slept . . . like the Prince de Conde. 

The following morning I took care of those glasses. 



Various Commentaries 



I 



"MEMORIES" AND "VOICES 



n chapter X, Leo talked about a form of supersensible knowledge, that is 
analogous to a remembering. Knowledge is transformed and no longer ap- 
pears as a representation or as a concept, but almost as a memory, as some- 
thing that arises from within and that belongs to us. The corresponding 
attitude of the spirit may be nurtured through the following exercise. In the 
evening, try to review backwards the content of everything you have experi- 
enced during the day or a part of the day. However, it is not a matter of 
"representing" in one's mind the various separate events, but rather of creat- 
ing a rhythm, the active perception of a continuity working backwards, not in 
the mind but rather in a sense of interiority, by remembering. What matters 
is to focus more on the act that the spirit is forced to perform (until you can 
reproduce it without content), rather than on that which is being recalled. 

In regard to the mantras and to the inner ear that is capable of abstracting 
from the material sound and perceiving the subtle sound of things and voices, 
we should begin with a discipline that distinguishes , through active atten- 
tion, the message connected to the different quality of sounds. Ordinary people 
in this regard are extremely distracted. They passively and hurriedly receive 
the physical vibration and automatically translate it into ideas; in other words, 
they identify with the emotions or reactions that it produces. Their auditory 
attitude, whether in regard to a man's voice, an animal's voice, or a mere 
noise, is basically the same. People live without understanding, surrounded 
by a world of sounds. What matters instead is to educate oneself in order to 
be able to hear the different qualities within the sound; in this way, one will 
subtly perceive what its background stems from — a living being, whether 
person or animal, or from a mere clash of things. Again, one needs to direct 
one's attention on this element, by identifying with it, allowing it to speak 
through the mere sound, excluding every 7 thing that comes from within one- 
self. This awakens one's ear to a certain degree, and helps one realize the 



369 
VARIOUS COMMENTARIES 

state of deafness in which one lived before. 

The practice of the Hindu doctrine of mantras corresponds largely to 
the use of dhikr in Muslim esotericism. We can find details of this in the 
writings of Al-GhazzalL The dhikr may simply consist of a "divine name 1 ' 
of Allah himself, or of the abstract form of hu (Him). In regard to indi- 
vidual practice, ritual isolation is strongly recommended, including the 
detail of symbolically covering one's head (e.g., the hood of Christian 
monks). The dhikr is incessantly repeated with one's mind focused on it, 
until one reaches the state in which the lips and the tongue stay still and 
the repetition takes place only "in the heart." Yet even this "sound" moved 
into the heart has its own form. This form needs to be overcome by pro- 
ceeding and intensifying the rhythm until the echo of the dhikr in the 
heart ceases, just as its physical pronunciation did. At that point, the "spirit" 
of the dhikr and its immaterial essence (= artha) are revealed; then one 
realizes them to be the essential part of the very Self of the practitioner. 

In Islam, in many cases the practice of dhikr has lost much of its purity 
as an exclusively inner and intellectual practice, and has acquired the form 
of a collective practice. The uninterrupted cadence and repetition of cer- 
tain formulas in this instance acquires a more or less hypnotic result, in 
order to neutralize the ordinary mental faculties and to propitiate paranor- 
mal states. The quality of these states is dubious unless the entire collec- 
tive practice is supervised by a Master, a qualified sheik. 

The use, or the abuse, of the liturgy in some so-called contemplative 
Christian monastic Orders (e.g., Carthusians or Carmelites) has roughly 
this second significance. It is not a mantric practice in the purest state, 
since it is virtually impossible to realize the liturgical formulas in any inner 
dimension they may have, in the course of their various and uninterrupted 
sequence lasting for several hours. Rather, the process aims at that which in 
Hindu terms may be characterized as the "slaying of the mental" (slaying of 
manas), namely, to the neutralization of the mind. The Christian monks 
assume that once this state has been achieved, an "action of grace" may be 
evident in a sense of spiritual enlightenment. The practice of the repetition 
of the divine names, which is similar to the active practice suggested by Al- 
Ghazzali, was followed by the Eastern churches, and still apparently plays a 
role in the monastic disciplines practiced at Mount Athos, being associated 
with breathing exercises (as in the case of some Muslim and Hindu schools). 



370 
VARIOUS COMMENTARIES 

The latter practice is found in a more characteristic way, with a precise 
magical-initiatic intention, in the practice of the Kabbalah. 

DECADENCE OF THE WORD 

Thinking of mantras in. their aspect as universal language and essential lan- 
guage, various ideas could be developed concerning the origin of languages, 
which can only have been sacred and from above. Joseph de Maistre made 
some interesting remarks on this in his Saint Petersburg Evenings, Until secu- 
lar philology produces a sacred science of language, many doors will remain 
closed in relation to what the word signified in primordial civilizations and 
what was preserved of it in later ages, as fragments mixed up with all kinds 
of debris. The process of the fall of the word not only refers to the change 
whereby it is understood only in its material, particularized, and spiritually 
dead form, but it can also be detected in the domain of the decayed word 
itself. If we needed a supplementary proof that mankind's "development" 
has not been an "evolution" but exactly the opposite, one could be given by 
the obvious poverty, inorganicity and superficiality of modern languages as 
compared to the ancient ones in which a certain connection with the sacred 
languages was still present. The extreme limit of a language that is two di- 
mensional, utilitarian, and stenographic rather than truly articulated is prob- 
ably the modem English language. Likewise, there is no doubt that the Anglo- 
Saxon civilization in general, ending up with America, represents the limit 
of the entire Western "progress." Conversely, among the living Western lan- 
guages that still retain a certain premodern, rhythmic-organic character in 
its structure is the German language, which curiously enough differs in this 
regard from others of the same Nordic family. This, however, is an order of 
considerations that we will not dwell on at this point. 

MORE ON THE INITIATIC DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY 

In regard to the initiatic doctrine of immortality (chapter V), some people 
have accused us of having "gone too far" when we denied the element in 
religion corresponding to the notion of an "immortal soul" with which 
every person is endowed. Even admitting that immortality, as an effective 
experience for man, is not a given fact but rather a possibility and a task, it 
does not necessarily exclude the existence of eternal principles in the hu- 



371 
VARIOUS COMMENTARIES 

man being. According to our critics, these principles have always existed 
and have always operated in mankind, even though people have not been 
aware of them. 

To this we reply that even if such eternal principles really existed, with- 
out the Self becoming aware of them, much less being able to activate and 
assimilate them, from the positive and experimental perspective of the 
initiatic path vis-a-vis the Self's own immortality, it is as if they did not 
exist. The consolation would be analogous to that supplied by a material- 
ist who declared that although the "soul" dies with the body, the matter of 
which a person is made remains indestructible. 

For instance, a table may exist or not, and I may or may not be aware 
that it exists. We cannot say the same thing for the Self. There is no Self on 
the one hand, and awareness of it on the other, but rather the substance of 
the Self is consciousness itself. Its being consists of its being conscious. 
Therefore, we cannot imagine that something of the Self could continue to 
exist once its consciousness is extinguished, in the same way that the table 
continues to exist regardless of whether one looks at it or not. When con- 
sciousness is extinguished and the sense of self-identity disappears, the Self 
also disappears, and that which may continue to exist, whether eternally 
or temporally, whether materially or spiritually, is no longer that Self. 

We have readily admitted from a doctrinal point of view the existence 
of a Self of which the human "Self" is but a pale reflex, corresponding to 
the atman of the Vpanishads and to the pumsha of Samkhya. However, that 
which a person experiences as his or her own "self" is not such a Self but 
only its pale reflection. If one prefers, one can speak not of the soul's disso- 
lution at death but rather of the reflection that is reabsorbed into the tran- 
scendent principle that has projected it 

In religious terms one could say that the soul is being reabsorbed into 
God. Yet one must admit that the same thing is being said in different 
words, because between the reflected Self and the absolute Self there is no 
continuity; the reabsorption of the former into the latter corresponds for 
all practical purposes to its dissolution. Things may be otherwise only in 
the presence of an active and conscious integration of the image or reflec- 
tion with its own source, which, of course, is the purpose of initiation, in 
its various degrees. 

As far as the other elements that survive the human soul are concerned, 



372 
VARIOUS COMMENTARIES 

leaving aside its residues and its psychic fascimile that is itself destined to 
die, what is left is what the Hindu tradition calls karma, the object of so 
much speculation by the Theosophists, Even that which is connected to 
karma has nothing to do with real immortality since this is an interplay of 
impersonal forces within the sphere of conditioned or samsaric existence. 
The corresponding teaching is that just as man through physical genera- 
tion may bestow existence on another individual who is distinct from him 
and to whom he passes on his biological and genetic inheritance, likewise 
his actions may determine a force that could generate another being, the 
characteristics of which will have some kind of relation to those very ac- 
tions. Such is karma, and this is why it has been taught that when a person 
has dissolved into the different components that return to their original 
sources, what remains is karma. 179 However, as we have already said, in 
this entire process, which is erroneously represented as the reincarnation 
of the "immortal soul," there is no basis for the continuation of a self- 
identity namely of a Self, since on this plane continuity is simply impos- 
sible. The best image we can offer is that of a flame that lights another 
flame: the fire is the same, and one flame generates the other, and yet it is 
a different flame from the first one. In the karmic domain, this is how things 
are. It is an order of things that are, in their own way "physical," and which 
do not apply in the least to the destiny of the spiritual personality 

Much more interesting are the considerations about the case in which a 
group of existences and therefore of "Selves" may be considered as many 
manifestations and incarnations (though not reincarnations) of one and 
the same principle of a superior order, which, having entered into the 
"stream," namely into the system of conditioned and contingent reality 
aims toward perfection. In this case, each of these existences and these 
"Selves" assumes the meaning of a single attempt that goes more or less 
forward. One image would be many assault waves of a single army: after 
one is launched, reaches a certain position, is destroyed or scattered, an- 
other wave follows, and then others, going more or less farther than the 
previous ones, at times gaining ground and at times losing it. Eventually 
one of these assault waves may achieve the original purpose shared by all 
the previous ones: then the series ends. Likewise, if we imagine these as- 



179. Biiiaddranyaka-upanhhad, III, II, 13. 



373 
VARIOUS COMMENTARIES 

sault waves to represent the individual Selves and various existences, not 
even here do we need to talk about reincarnation because it is not as if a 
wave is continued into the next. Rather, if a wave does not achieve its 
purpose, it becomes scattered and exhausted; the unity may be found else- 
where, namely in the army to which the assault waves belong, and in the 
common purpose that has animated their separate efforts. Ibsen's symbol 
of the "man who melts buttons," namely buttons that are not up to stan- 
dard, in order to produce better ones, may be applied to this order of ideas; 
the same principle, with precise reference to initiatic views, is often found 
in Meyrinkfs books. The "perfect" button and the assault wave that finally 
achieves its purpose after all the other ones have been decimated corre- 
spond to the being in which the above-mentioned initiatic reintegration is 
achieved, and which is identical to the type of the "Awakened One." 

IMMANENCE AND TRANSCENDENCE 

Some people, who approach the domain of initiatic disciplines with great 
interest, often ask us questions such as these: "We follow you on every- 
thing that concerns practice. However, we do not fully understand your 
definitive point of view about the supreme spiritual problems. Does your 
teaching proclaim transcendence or immanence? Do you believe in a per- 
sonal God or not? You need to clarify your ideas about this." 

Clearly these questions show a residual influence of the demon of phi- 
losophy and of the abstract way in which spiritual problems are dealt with 
in the common mentality. In any case, it is possible to give an answer in 
the following terms. 

From an initiatic and experimental point of view, the dilemma of "ei- 
ther immanence or transcendence" does not exist, since immanence and 
transcendence do not correspond to two philosophical systems to be cho- 
sen according to one's fancy and on the basis of various speculative prefer- 
ences, but rather correspond to two points of view, both of which are real 
That which one regards as immanent, the other may regard as transcen- 
dent, as perspectives change. 

On the cosmological and theological plane, every true initiatic teach- 
ing can only be translated into a doctrine of transcendence, because in 
either form it will always admit a principle that is not exhausted by cre- 
ation or "manifestation," which lies beyond not only any natural, but also 



374 
VARIOUS COMMENTARIES 

any heavenly and divine form of existence. However, on the practical plane, 
in reference to mankind and to its possibilities, the perspective is twofold, 
as we have said. 

As long as a man remains a man, unless his worldview is utterly barren 
and truncated, transcendence is true. True spirituality must necessarily be 
perceived by him as "other," endowed with the same characteristics of 
bright distance, inaccessibility, and uninhabi lability that glacial peaks pos- 
sess in the eyes of valley dwellers. However, in the adept the perspective 
becomes inverted, since his is almost the point of view of the peak: he has 
taken residence in the central, metaphysical element; thus, if he perceives 
anything as extraneous and distant, it will be the human and sensible world. 

Thus one should not pose the "philosophical" problem of immanence 
or transcendence, but rather ask in respect to whom something is declared 
to be immanent and in respect to whom something is declared transcen- 
dent. In other words, it is necessary to establish the system of reference. 
The fact that in initiatic teachings and even in the pages of this book some 
principles are sometimes regarded as immanent and sometimes as tran- 
scendent constitutes a mere difference in terminology; to those who un- 
derstand, it does not affect the essence in the least. 

What shall we say about the question of a "personal" or "theistic" God? 
Does esotericism have any room for him? Certainly; but first we need to 
establish in what way. In many religions, including Christianity, he passes 
for the ultimate reference point. Not so in the initiatic teachings. The "per- 
sonal God" (Hinduism's Ishvara) is itself a manifestation and should not 
be equated with the unconditioned and the transcendent. The latter is 
necessarily exempt from form and personhood, though it is at the base of 
every form and every person, beginning with divine forms and persons 
(e.g., the Blessed Trinity, the twelve Olympian gods, the Hindu Trimurti, 
etc). Various mystical groups have adopted this reference point, though in 
a confused and passionate way Esotericism, on the other hand, makes it 
clear and precise. Thus not even here do we find antitheses or alternatives. 
The personal God exists and is true from a certain point of view; which is, 
however, hierarchically inferior to that espoused by every initiatic and 
metaphysically complete teaching. 

The antitheses in this regard cannot be upheld by those wishing to 
defend the initiatic perspective; they can arise only from those who want 



375 
VARIOUS COMMENTARIES 

to make absolute an inferior point of view, which is what the theistic per- 
spective is. These people are totally unaware of the contingent reasons 
that, in some traditional forms, have made this limitation of knowledge 
opportune. Obviously such antitheses, born out of ignorance, can never 
be valuable in the higher, initiatic domain. And wherever we detect a ten- 
dentious emphasis it is even possible that it betrays suspect influences, 
most likely related to the so-called "counter-initiation." Some people may 
regard it as the greatest paradox that some religious and "traditional" forms, 
in their militant, apologetic, and exclusivist attitudes, fall victim to those 
forces of obstruction and inversion that they call ''diabolical"; and yet this 
is how things are, especially in our day and age, in many cases, . . . 

UNREALITY OF HEAVY BODIES 

If we have thus rightly described the Authentic Existent, we see that it 
cannot be any kind of body nor the under-stuff of body: in such entities 
the Being is simply the existing of things outside of Being. But body, a non- 
existence? Matter, on which all this universe rises a nonexistence? Moun- 
tain and rock, the wide solid earth, all that resists, all that can be struck 
and driven, surely all proclaim the real existence of the corporeal? And 
how, it will be asked, can we, on the contrary attribute Being, and the only 
Authentic being, to entities like Soul and Intellect, things having no weight 
or pressure, yielding to no force, offering no resistance, things not even 
visible? 

Yet even the corporeal realm witnesses for us; the resting earth has cer- 
tainly a scantier share in Being than belongs to what has more motion and 
less solidity — and less than belongs to its own most upward element, for 
Fire begins, already to flit up and away outside of the body-kind. 

In fact, it appears to be precisely the most self-sufficing that bear least 
hardly least painfully, on other things, while the heaviest and earthiest 
bodies — deficient, falling, unable to bear themselves upward — these, by 
the very down-thrust due to their feebleness, offer the resistance that be- 
longs to the falling habit and to the lack of buoyancy. It is lifeless objects 
that deal the severest blows; they hit hardest and hurt most; where there is 
life — that is to say participation in Being — there is beneficence toward the 
environment, all the greater as the measure of Being is fuller. Again, Move- 



376 
VARIOUS COMMENTARIES 

merit, which is a sort of life within bodies, an imitation of true Life, is the 
more decided where there is the least of body — a sign that the waning of 
Being makes the object affected more distinctly corporeal 

The changes known as affections show even more clearly that where 
the bodily quality is most pronounced, susceptibility is at its intensest — 
earth more susceptible than other elements, and these others again more 
or less so in the degree of their corporeality. Sever the other elements and, 
failing some preventive force, they join again; but earthly matter divided 
remains apart indefinitely. Things whose nature represents a diminishment 
have no power of recuperation after even a slight disturbance and they 
perish. Thus, what has most definitely become body having most closely 
approximated to nonbeing, lacks the strength to reknit its unity: the heavy 
and violent crash of body against body works destruction, and weak is 
powerful against weak, nonbeing against its like. 

Thus far we have been meeting those who, on the evidence of thrust 
and resistance, identify body with real being and find assurance of truth in 
the phantasms that reach us through the senses, those, in a word, who, 
like dreamers, take for actualities the figments of their sleeping vision. The 
sphere of sense, the Soul in its slumber; for all of the Soul that is in body is 
asleep and the true getting-up is not bodily but from the body 

(Plotinus, Enneads, III, vi, 6) 180 

A MISTAKEN WAY 

This love (of the soul that has its proper reason — logos — outside itself) is 
like a gadfly tormented by unsatisfied desire, because no sooner has it got 
satisfaction than its (substantial) want persists. It cannot be satisfied be- 
cause a thing of mixture (of self and "other") never can be so: true satisfac- 
tion is only for what is plenitude in its own being; where craving is due to 
an inborn deficiency there may be satisfaction at some given moment but 
it does not last. Love, then, has on the one side the powerlessness of its 
native inadequacy, on the other the true satisfaction that is solely of the 
(self-sufficient) nature of the Logos. 

(Plotinus, Enneads, III, v, 7) 1S1 
THE 

MEANING AND ORIGIN 
OF THE TANTRAS 



In the first few centuries of the Christian era, and in a more marked 
way around the fifth century A.D., a peculiar upheaval took place in 
the area in which the great Indo-Aryan civilization had grown: the 
appearance, development, establishment, and diffusion of a new 
spiritual and religious trend, characterized by newer features when 
compared with the prevalent motifs of the previous period. This 
trend penetrated everywhere and heavily influenced what is gener- 
ally called Hinduism: it affected yoga schools, post-Upanishadic 
speculation, and the cults of Vishnu and Shiva. In Buddhism it gave 
rise to a new current, the so-called Vajrayana (the "Way of the 
Diamond" or "Way of the Thunderbolt"). At last it joined with var- 
ious forms of popular cults and magic practices on the one hand, 
and with strictly esoteric and initiatory teachings on the other. 

This new current may be designated as Tantrism. In the end it 
led to a synthesis of all the main motifs of Hindu spirituality, 
finding a particular expression and vindicating its own version of 
the metaphysics of history. The terms Tantra (a word that often 
simply means "treatise," or "exposition," since it is derived from 
the root tan (which means "to extend" and also "to continue," "to 
develop"), and Agama (a word designating other texts of the same 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

subject matter) have been understood to mean "what has pro- 
ceeded," "that which has come down." The intent was to convey 
the idea that Tantrism represents an extension or a further develop- 
ment of those traditional teachings originally found in the Vedas 
and later articulated in the Brahmanas, the Upanishads, and the 
Puranas. That is why the Tantras have claimed for themselves the 
dignity befitting a "fifth Veda," that is, a further revelation beyond 
what is found in the traditional four Vedas. To this they added a 
reference to the doctrine of the four ages (yugas) of the world. 1 It is 
claimed that the teachings, rites, and disciplines that would have 
been viable in the first age (the Krita or Satya Yuga, the equivalent 
of Hesiod's "golden age") are no longer fit for people living in the 
following ages, especially in the last age, the "dark age" (Kali Yuga, 
the "Iron Age," the "Age of the Wolf" in the Edda). Mankind in 
these later ages may find knowledge, a worldview, rituals, and 
adequate practices for elevating humans over and beyond their 
condition and for overcoming death (mrityun javate), not in the 
Vedas and in other strictly traditional texts, but rather in the Tantras 
and in the Agamas. It is stated therefore that only Tantric practices 
based on shakti (shakti-sadhana) are suitable and efficacious in our 
contemporary age: all the others are considered to be as powerless 
as a snake deprived of its poison. 

Although Tantrism is far from rejecting ancient wisdom, it is 
characterized by a reaction against (1) a hollow and stereotypical 
ritualism, (2) mere speculation or contemplation, and (3) any asceti- 
cism of a unilateral, mortifying, and penitential nature. It opposes 
to contemplation a path of action, of practical realization, and of 
direct experience. Its password is practice (sadhana, abhyasa). 3 This 
runs on the lines of what may be designated the "dry way," resem- 
bling the original Buddhist doctrine of the awakening, with its 
reaction against a degenerated brahmanism and its dislike of specu- 
lations and hollow ritualism. 4 One among the many Tantric texts 
remarks rather significantly: 

It is a womanly thing to establish superiority through convinc- 
ing arguments; it is a manly thing to conquer the world through 
one's power. Reasoning, argument, and inference may be the 
work of other schools [shastras]; but the work of the Tantra is 
to accomplish superhuman and divine events through the force 
of their own words of power [mantras]. 5 



The Meaning and the Origin of the Tantras 

And also: 

The special virtue of the Tantra lies in its mode of Sadhana. It is 
neither mere worship [upasana] nor prayer. It is not lamenting or 
contrition or repentance before the Deity. It is the Sadhana which 
is the union of Purusha and Prakrti; the Sadhana which joins the 
Male Principle and the Mother Element within the body, and 
strives to make the attributed attributeless. . . . This Sadhana is 
to be performed through the awakening of the forces within the 
body . . . This is not mere "philosophy," a mere attempt to pon- 
der upon the husks of words, but something which is to be done 
in a thoroughly practical matter. The Tantras say: "Begin prac- 
ticing under the guidance of a good Guru; if you do not obtain 
favorable results immediately, you can freely give it up." 6 

Thus Tantras often employ an analogy taken from medicine: 
the efficacy of a doctrine, like a drug, is proved by the results it 
produces, and in this particular case, by the siddhis, or powers, that 

-7 

it grants. Another text says: "Yoga siddhis are not obtained by 
wearing yoga garments or by conversation about yoga, but only 
through tireless practice. This is the secret of success. There is no 
doubt about it." 8 

In the previous quotation referring to the body, another impor- 
tant point was alluded to. The analysis of the last age, the "dark 
age" or Kali Yuga, brings to light two essential features. The first is 
that mankind living in this age is strictly connected to the body and 
cannot prescind from it; therefore, the only way open is not that of 
pure detachment (as in early Buddhism and in the many varieties 
of yoga) but rather that of knowledge, awakening, and mastery 
over secret energies trapped in the body. The second characteristic 
is that of the dissolution typical of this age. During the Kali Yuga, 
the bull of dharma stands on only one foot (it lost the other three 
during the previous three ages). This means that the traditional law 
(dharma) is wavering, is reduced to a shadow of its former self, and 
seems to be almost succumbing. During Kali Yuga, however, the 
goddess Kali, who was asleep in the previous ages, is now fully 
awake. I will write at greater length about Kali, a prominent Tantric 
goddess, in the following pages; for now, let us say that this sym- 
bolism implies that during the last age elementary, infernal, and 
even abyssal forces are untrammeled. The immediate task consists 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

in facing and absorbing these forces, in taking the risk of "riding 
the tiger," to use a Chinese expression that may best describe this 
situation, or "to transform the poison into medicine," according to 
a Tantric expression. Hence the rituals and special practices of what 
has been named Left-Hand Tantrism, or the Path of the Left Hand 
(Vama-marga), which despite some problematic aspects (orgies, use 
of sex, etc.) represents one of the most interesting forms within the 
trend analyzed in this study. 

It is therefore stated - and this is significant - that considering 
the situation of the Kali Yuga, teachings that were previously kept 
secret may now be revealed in different degrees, though a word of 
caution is issued concerning the danger they may represent for 
those who are not initiated. 9 Hence what we have so far mentioned: 
the emergence, in Tantrism, of esoteric and initiatory teachings. 

A third point must be emphasized. In Tantrism the passage 
from the ideal of "liberation" to that of "freedom" marks an essen- 
tial change in the ideals and ethics of Hinduism. It is true that even 
previously the ideal of the jivanmukta had been known. The word 
means "one who is freed," that is, the one who has achieved the 
unconditioned, the sahaja, while alive, in his own body. Tantrism 
introduces a specification, however: to the existential condition of 
mankind living in the last age, it relates the overcoming of the 
antithesis between enjoyment of the world and ascesis, or yoga, 
which is spiritual discipline aimed at liberation. "In the other 
schools - thus claim the Tantras - one excludes the other, but in the 
path we follow these opposites meet." 10 In other words, a discipline 
is developed that allows one to be free and invulnerable even while 
enjoying the world, or anything the world may offer. In the mean- 
time, the world ceases to be seen in terms of maya - that is, pure 
appearance, illusion, or mirage - as is the case in Vedantic philoso- 
phy. The world is not maya but power. This paradoxical coexist- 
ence of freedom, or of the dimension of transcendence in one's self, 
and enjoyment of the world, of freely experimenting with the world's 
pleasures, carries the strictest relation with Tantrism's formula and 
main goal: the union of the impassive Shiva with the ardent Shakti 
in one's being and at all levels of reality. 

This leads us to consider a further fundamental element of 
Tantrism, namely, Shaktism. In the complex movement called 
Tantrism, a central role was played by the emergence and predomi- 
nance of the figure and of the symbol of a goddess or divine 
woman, Shakti, in its various epiphanies (especially under the forms 
of Kali and Durga). She may be either portrayed by herself, as the 



The Meaning and the Origin of the Tantras 

supreme principle of the universe, or reproduced under the species 
of multiple Shaktis, that is, female divinities who accompany male 
Hindu gods (who had enjoyed a greater autonomy in the previous 
era), and even various buddhas and bodhisattvas of late Buddhism. 
This marks the emergence in a thousand forms of the motif of 
divine couples, in which the feminine, Shaktic element enjoys a 
great role, to the point of becoming the predominant element in 
some of its currents. 

Strictly speaking, this current (Shaktism) has archaic exogenous 
origins, and it traces its roots to an autochthonous spirituality that 
is visibly analogous to that of the protohistoric, pelasgic, and pre- 
Hellenic Mediterranean world; in fact, the Hindu, "black goddesses", 
(such as Kali and Durga) and those worshiped in paleo- 
Mediterranean areas (Demeter Melaina, Cybele, Diana of Ephesus, 
and Diana of Tauris, including their Christian counterparts such as 
the "black Madonnas" and Saint Melaina) can be reduced to the 
same prototype. In this substratum, corresponding to India's 
Dravidian populations and, in part, to strata and cycles of older 
civilizations, such as that which was brought to light in various 
excavation sites at Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa (dating from 3000 
B.C.), the cult of a Great Mother or Universal Mother (magna mater) 
was a central motif, and it recovered an importance practically 
unknown to the Aryan-Vedic tradition and to its essentially virile 
and patriarchical spirituality. This cult, which during the Aryan 
(Indo-European) conquest and colonization survived by going un- 
derground, reemerged in Tantrism, in the manifold variety of Shaktic 
Hindu and Tibetan divinities. The result was, on the one hand, the 
revivifying of what had been latent in popular classes and, on the 
other hand, the outlining of a Tantric worldview. 

Metaphysically speaking, the divine couple corresponds to the 
two essential aspects of every cosmic principle: the god represent- 
ing the unchanging dimension, the goddess representing the en- 
ergy, the acting power of phenomena, and in a sense the dimension 
of immanence ("life" versus "being"). The appearance of Shaktism 
in the ancient Indo-Aryan world during the Kali Yuga may be con- 
sidered a barometric sign of a shifting of perspectives; it speaks of 
an interest in "immanent" and active principles at work in the world, 
rather than of anything related to sheer transcendence. 

Besides, the name of the goddess, Shakti, comes from the root 
shak ("to be able to," "to have the strength to act"), which means 
"power." On a speculative note, we may add that the view of the 
world that identifies in Shakti the supreme principle is also a view 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

of the world as power. More so than others, the Tantrism of the 
Kashmir school, by associating this view to traditional speculations 
and by reformulating on this foundation the theory of cosmic prin- 
ciples (tattva) typical of Sankhya and the other darshanas, was 
responsible for developing a metaphysical synthesis of great value, 
more on which will be found later, and which constitutes the 
general background for the entire system of Tantric yoga and re- 
lated disciplines. Here Shakti has almost completely lost her origi- 
nal maternal and gynocratic features and has assumed the meta- 
physical features of the primordial principle, thus becoming closely 
related to Upanishadic or Mahayana Buddhist doctrines, which 
derived from that principle a specifically activistic and energetic 
emphasis. 

It is also understandable how Shaktism and Tantrism contrib- 
uted, in Hindu and Tibetan areas, to the development of magical 
practices, often of an inferior kind, which bordered on witchcraft; 
eventually, what frequently took place was a reviviscence of prac- 
tices and rituals proper of the previously mentioned pre-Indo- 
European substratum. As we shall see, however, these very same 
practices, often of an orgiastic and sexual nature, did not fail, in a 
Tantric milieu, to rise to a higher plane. 

As for the rest, the various goddesses, modifications of the one 
Shakti, were differentiated in two kinds: the first, luminous and 
beneficial (e.g., Parvati, Uma, Lakshiami, Gauri); the second, fright- 
ful and dark, (Kali, Durga Bhairavi,, Camunda). This differentiation 
is not precise, since the same goddess could assume either of the 
two aspects when reflecting the attitude of the devotee approaching 
her. In any event, the goddesses of the bright and prevalently 
maternal kind, who preserved their pre-Aryan nature, have become 
pivotal in those popular and devotional religious movements par- 
alleling Tantrism, which shared with Tantrism an intolerance for a 
stereotypical ritualism and for mere speculation. People turned to 
devotion and to cult (bhakti and puja), in order to achieve emotional 
experiences (rasa) with mystical overtones. The natural consequence 
of this was that the Goddess in her bright aspect became the favor- 
ite reference point of the masses, coming to hold almost the same 
status that the "Mother of God" enjoys in Christian devotion. It 
must be noticed that this orientation was not a new phenomenon, 
since one of its roots was Vaishnavism (the cult of Vishnu). What 
was new, however, almost having the value of a barometric index, 
was its development and diffusion outside the lower classes of 
Indian society, to which it had so far been confined, and its bios- 



The Meaning and the Origin of the Tantras 

soming into the so-called Way of Devotion, Bhaktimarga, which 
had in Ramanuja its chief representative. I have commented else- 
where on the analogies with Christian theism. 

.The properly Tantric goddesses, however, are the Shaktis of 
the Path of the Left Hand, mainly Kali and Durga. Under their aegis 
Tantrism becomes integrated with Shaivism, the cult of Shiva, while 
through the bright goddesses it encounters Vaishnavism and the 
Way of the Right Hand. It is claimed that even Shiva has no Vedic 
origins: in the Vedas one finds Rudra, who may be considered his 
equivalent, and who propitiated Shiva's reception in the Hindu 
pantheon. Rudra, the "Lord of Thunder," is a personification of the 
divinity in its destructive aspect, that of a "destructive transcen- 
dence"; therefore, in more practical terms he is the "god of death," 
the "slayer." Shaivism exalts Shiva, the embodiment of all the 
attributes of the supreme deity, as well as the creator portrayed in 
an awesome and highly symbolical icon, Nataraja, which is his 
dance representing the rhythm of both the creation and destruction 
of the worlds. In a Tantric context, Shiva, while preserving the 
features typical of pure transcendence, is usually associated with a 
terrifying Shakti, such as Kali and Durga, who personify his own 
unrestrained and untamable manifestation. When Hinduism canon- 
ized the doctrine of trimurti (i.e., the three aspects of the one su- 
preme principle, personified in three divinities, Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Shiva), the meaning of the two ways, the Right Hand and Left 
Hand, became clear. The first element in the trimurti is Brahma, the 
creator god; the second is Vishnu, the god preserving creation and 
the cosmic order; and the third is Shiva, the destroyer (as a result 
of his transcendence acting on what is finite and conditioned). The 
Way of the Right Hand is under the aegis of the first two gods, or 
aspects of the divine, while the Path of the Left Hand is under the 
sign of the third God, Shiva. This is the way that essentially emerged 
from the encounter between Shaivism and Tantrism. 

Summing up, we may consider typical of Tantric speculation a 
metaphysics and a theology of shakti, namely, of the Principle as 
power, or of the "active brahman." What comes next is the use of 
sadhana, the practice leading to self-realization. Together with the 
metaphysics of shakti, we find an emphasis on the magical and 
empowering dimensions within a vast traditional and ritualistic 
heritage, which often led to the formulation of esoteric and initia- 
tory teachings. In particular, the doctrine of the mantras, which 
evolved from a metaphysics of the word, was assimilated to 
Tantrism. The mantra came to be seen no longer primarily as a 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

liturgical formula, prayer, or mystical sound, but rather as "word of 
power," gaining such an importance that Tantrism was sometimes 
referred to (especially in some questionable Tibetan Buddhist ver- 
sions) as Mantrayana, the Way of Mantras. Practical concerns led to 
a strict connection between Tantrism and yoga. A specifically Tantric 
character is found particularly in hatha yoga (the "violent" yoga, 
for such is the literal meaning of the word, and not "physical" yoga 
or, even worse, the "yoga of health"), understood as "yoga of the 
serpent's power," kundalini yoga, which is based on the awakening 
and employment, in view of one's liberation, of the primordial 
shakti immanent in the human organism. In this kind of yoga we 
find a science of the "occult corporeity," that is, the hyperphysical 
anatomy and physiology of the human organism, in the context of 
correlations between man and world, microcosm and macrocosm. 
Breathing and sex are considered to be the only two disciplines still 
available to mankind living in the Kali-Yuga. Sadhana is based on 
them. In yoga, strictly speaking, which carried on the vast majority 
of Patanjali's classical yoga, the emphasis is mainly on breathing, 
pranayama. Women, sex, and sexual magic play a major role in 
another sector of Tantrism in which, as it was already mentioned, 
even ancient practices of the dark pre-Aryan substratum were bor- 
rowed, transformed, integrated, and elevated to an initiatory plane. 
Especially in Siddhantachara and in Kulachara, considered by au- 
thoritative texts such as the Kularnava-Tantra (11, 7, 8) and the 
Mahanirvana-Tantra (4:43-45, 15:179-80) to be the two highest and 
most esoteric schools of the Path of the Left Hand, the emphasis 
shifted from liberation to the freedom of the man-god, that is, one 
who has overcome the human condition and is beyond any law. 
The highest concern in this current is how to achieve the supreme 
state that is seen as the union of Shiva and Shakti, whose mating 
symbolizes the impulse of reuniting being (Shiva) with power 
(Shakti). Tantric Buddhism saw in the achievement of this unity the 
so-called mahasukhakaya, a "body" or a condition even higher than 
the dharmakaya itself, which is the cosmic root from which every 
awakened one, or buddha, derives. 12 



Recently Tantrism has become well known in the West, and its im- 
portance within Hinduism acknowledged. Besides some scholarly 
monographs, the merit of acquainting the Western world with a 
vast material of texts and translations concerning Hindu Tantrism 
belongs to Sir John Woodroffe (Arthur Avalon is a pseudonym that 
he used when writing books together with Hindu scholars). W. Y. 



8 



The Meaning and the Origin of the Tantras 

Evans-Wentz and the Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup are responsible for 
the translation of various texts of Tantric and Tibetan Buddhism, 
the so-called Vajrayana, that previously existed only in the form of 
codices and manuscripts. 14 One should also mention the pioneering 
works of De la Vallee Poussin, of Von Glasenapp, G. Tucci, and H. 
Hoffmann, and especially the precious material concerning Tantrism 
in Mircea Eliade's superb work Yoga: Immortalite et liberie (Paris, 
1954). Previously, outside the specialized circles of learned orien- 
talists, Tantrism was relatively unknown and even portrayed under 
a sinister light (someone even referred to it as "the worst kind of 
black magic"). This happened because what had been known was 
considered excesses or deviations from this current, instead of au- 
thentic elements that clashed with the puritanical and "spiritualist" 
mentality of the time, thus causing scandals and outrage. 

This presentation, in which I have tried to quote the original 
texts as often as possible (especially those published by Woodroffe), 
deals essentially with doctrinal and practical aspects of Tantrism. I 
have noticed that Tantrism appears to be a synthesis, or better, a 
supplement of previous teachings. I will therefore expound many 
of those teachings that were incorporated in Tantrism, so that this 
book may also provide the reader with an overview of Hindu 
tradition, although mainly from a Tantric perspective. 

I have resolved not to add anything personal or arbitrary; 
however, since my task is not merely to expound but also to inter- 
pret esoteric knowledge, which in Tantrism plays a major role, I 
have been able to substantiate some elements, owing to my ability 
to read between the lines of the texts, my personal experiences, and 
the comparisons I have established with parallel teachings found in 
other esoteric traditions. As for the methodological principle adopted 
in this book, I have adopted the guiding principle employed in my 
previous books: to maintain the same distance both from the two- 
dimensional, specialized findings typical of university-level and 
academic orientalism and from the digressions of our contempo- 
rary "spiritualists" and "occultists." 



II 



KNOWLEDGE AND POWER 



Tantrism, in its emphasis on self-empowerment, recaptures and 
stresses what may be called "traditional knowledge" of a meta- 
physical rather than profane nature. This knowledge is witnessed 
from the very beginning not only in Hindu areas but also in other 
traditional civilizations of a higher kind, such as those that flour- 
ished before the advent of modern civilization. It will be useful to 
point out briefly the implications of this kind of knowledge. 

India possessed a metaphysics based on "revelation" (akachani, 
shruti), a term that should be understood differently than in the 
context of monotheistic religions, in which it is assumed that the 
deity has bestowed special knowledge on humanity, who is thus a 
passive recipient, and that a given organization (e.g., the Christian 
church) is in charge of safeguarding divine revelation in the form 
of dogmas. 

Shruti, however, corresponds to the exposition of what has 
been "seen" and revealed (made known) by certain individuals, the 
so-called rishi, whose high "stature" is at the basis of tradition. 
Rishi, from dric, "to see," means precisely "one who has seen." The 
Vedas, which are considered to be the foundation of the entire 
orthodox Hindu tradition, take their name from the word vid, mean- 



10 



Knowledge and Power 

ing both "to see" and "to know," which is an eminent and direct 
kind of knowledge assimilated by analogy to the act of seeing. The 
ancient Western counterpart to this term is found in Hellas, where 
the notion of "idea," because of its root id, identical to the Sanskrit 
vid (hence Veda), suggests a knowledge based on seeing. Tradition 
in the form of shruti records and proposes what the rishi have 
"seen" directly, on a superindividual and superhuman plane. In its 
inner and essential aspect, the foundation of the entire Hindu meta- 
physics may be said to rest on this. 

Regarding a knowledge that presents itself under these terms, 
the attitude to be taken is not different from that taken toward 
one who claims that in an unknown continent there are certain things, 
or toward a physicist expounding the results of his experiments. 
One may simply believe, relying on the authority and truthfulness 
of the interlocutor; or one may attempt to verify personally whether 
what has been said is true or not, in the first instance, by undertaking 
a trip, and in the second, by gathering all the elements necessary 
for reproducing the experiment oneself. These are the only two 
sensible attitudes to be taken regarding a rishi's claims, unless one 
intends to ignore anything related to metaphysics. This is not a matter 
of abstract concepts, of "philosophy" in the modern sense of the term, 
or of dogmas, but rather of material from which experiences can 
be derived, since tradition offers the means and singles out the 
disciplines with which it is possible to "verify," through personal and 
direct evidence, the reality of what has been communicated. It 
seems that in the Christian West the adoption of a similar experi- 
mental approach has been granted only to mysticism, since theology 
defined it as a cognitio experimentalis del and described it as some- 
thing that is beyond both mere faith and agnosticism. (Christian 
mysticism, however, should not be equated with the kind of knowl- 
edge I have been talking about, because its background is emo- 
tional rather than noetic, and religious rather than metaphysical). 

The prevailing orientation of the Tantras runs on the same 
lines. They repeatedly affirm that a mere theoretical exposition of 
doctrine has no value whatsoever. What especially matters, accord- 
ing to them, is the practical method of self-fulfillment, the body of 
means and rituals through which certain hidden truths may be 
recognized. This is why Tantras wish to be referred to as sadhana- 
shastra - sadhana being derived from the root sadh, which means 
exerting will power, effort, training, or activity in the hope of 
achieving a given result. A Tantric author remarked: "At the present 
time the general public are ignorant of the principles of the Tantra 



11 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

Sastra. The cause of this ignorance is the fact that the Tantra Sastra 
is a Sadhana Sastra, the greater part of which becomes intelligible 
only through Sadhana." 1 

It is therefore not enough to abide by the theory of the identity 
between the deeper self (atman) and the principle of the universe 
(brahman) and "to remain idle, vaguely thinking of the conscious 
ether." The Tantras deny the value of knowledge to this. In order to 
obtain true knowledge, one must be transformed by action; hence 
kriya, action, became the password. To this idea, Tantric Buddhism, 
or Vajrayana, gave a supple expression by employing the symbol of 
sexual union between the "effective way" (upaya) and knowing, in 
which the former plays the male role. 

It should be noted that in the higher forms of Tantrism this 
point of view is even applied to cult and eventually not only to 
metaphysics, to the sacred and transforming knowledge, but also to 
knowledge of nature. 

As far as cult (puja) is concerned, I shall discuss later the 
special role that it plays in Tantrism, together with the various 
evocations and ritual and magical identifications. Moreover, it is a 
Tantric notion that one cannot adore a god without "becoming" 
that god, which brings us back to experimentalism rather than to 
any religious dualism. 

As far as the sciences of nature are concerned, we would have 
to go to great lengths to explain the opposition between "tradi- 
tional" knowledge and knowledge of the so-called scientific, mod- 
ern type. This is not just the view of Tantrism, since on this matter 
it followed previous traditions and in the process of developing its 
own cosmology and its doctrine of manifestation it borrowed, 
adapted, and developed their teachings and fundamental principles. 

Briefly stated, here is the situation: According to the modern 
point of view (which in a Hindu perspective would be considered 
to be typical of the most advanced phase of the "dark age"), we can 
directly apprehend reality only through those aspects revealed to 
us by physical senses and by their extension, namely scientific 
instruments, or, according to the terminology proper to some phi- 
losophies, through its "phenomenic aspects." Positive sciences gather 
and organize data provided by sensory experiences, and only after 
having made a certain choice between them (excluding those with 
a qualitative character and essentially relying on those that are 
susceptible to measurement and "computation") does it inductively 
arrive at some knowledge and laws of an abstract and conceptual 
nature. To them, however, there no longer corresponds an intuition, 



12 



Knowledge and Power 

an unmediated perception, or an intrinsic evidence. Their truth is 
indirect and conditioned, and it depends on experimental examina- 
tion, which may eventually lead to a reshaping of the previous 
system. 

In the modern world, in addition to science one encounters 
"philosophy," but only to find in it abstractions and a mere concep- 
tual speculation, which is broken down into a discordant multiplic- 
ity of systems espoused by individual thinkers. This world of phi- 
losophy may be said to be eminently "unrealistic." The choice 
seems to be between these two alternatives: either a direct and 
concrete knowledge depending on the senses, or a knowledge that 
is presumed to be able to go beyond this "phenomenic" world of 
appearances, but that is still abstract, cerebral, merely conceptual, 
or hypothetical (scientific philosophies and theories). 

This means that the ideal of "seeing," namely, of a direct form 
of knowledge verging on the heart of reality, despite having a 
noetic, objective character (an ideal that was still preserved in the 
medieval notion of intuitio intellectualis), has been set aside. It is 
interesting to notice that in the so-called European critical philoso- 
phy of Kant, intellectual intuition is still thought of as a faculty 
capable of apprehending not just the phenomena but the essences 
as well (the "thing in itself," the noumenon), and yet this capability 
is assumed to be precluded to man (just as scholastic philosophy 
had taught). That assumption was made in order to clarify, through 
antithesis, what according to Kant was the only knowledge avail- 
able to man: mere sensory knowledge, scientific knowledge, whose 
abstract, nonintuitive character we have so far discussed, and which 
may show with a high degree of precision how forces of nature act, 
but not what they are. 

In esoteric teachings, including the Hindu ones, such a limita- 
tion is considered to be surmountable. As we shall see, classical 
yoga in its various articulations (yoganga) may be said to offer the 
methods of a systematic overcoming of such a limitation. The bot- 
tom line is this: there is no such thing as a world of "phenomena," 
of perceptible forms, and behind it, an impenetrable, true reality: 
the essence. There is only one given reality, which is multidimen- 
sional; there is also a hierarchy of possible forms of human and 
superhuman experiences, in relation to which these various dimen- 
sions are progressively disclosed, until one is able to perceive di- 
rectly the essential reality. The type or ideal of knowing, which is 
that of a direct knowledge (sakshastra, aparokshajnana) of a real ex- 
perience and of an immediate evidence (anubhava), is always pre- 



13 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

served in all these levels. As we previously stated, the common 
person, especially the one living in the end times, in the Kali Yuga, 
can enjoy such a knowledge only when it comes to physical and 
sensory reality. The rishi, the yogi, or the Tantric Siddha can go 
beyond that reality, in the context of what may be called an integral 
and transcendental experimentalism. According to this point of 
view there is no such thing as a relative reality and, beyond it, an 
absolute, impervious reality, but rather a relative, conditioned 
method of perceiving the only reality, and an absolute method. 

The immediate connection between this traditional epistemol- 
ogy and the main concerns of Tantrism is rather obvious. In fact, in 
this order of ideas, the way to any superior knowledge seems to be 
contingent upon one's self- transformation, an existential and onto- 
logical change of level, and therefore, upon action, sadhana. This 
conception contrasts with the general view offered by the modern 
world. Modern scientific knowledge, in its technical applications, 
confers to modern man multiple possibilities with impressive con- 
sequences on the practical and material plane, while leaving him, 
on a concrete plane, at the same level. For instance, if through 
modern science we happen to learn the approximate processes and 
constant laws of physical phenomena, our existential situation has 
still not changed a bit. In the first place, the fundamental elements 
of physics are nothing but differential functions and integrals, namely, 
abstract algebraic entities, of which, in a strict sense, we cannot claim 
to have either an intuitive image or a concept, since they are mere 
instruments of calculation ("energy," "mass," "cosmic constant," 
"curved space," are nothing but verbal symbols). Second, after we have 
"known" all this, our real relationship with phenomena still has not 
changed. The same applies to the scientist who elaborates knowledge 
of such a kind and even to one who develops innovative technology: 
fire will still burn him, organic modifications and passions will still 
trouble his soul, time will still dominate him with its laws, the sight of 
nature will still not speak to him, but it will mean to him less than it 
did to primitive man. This is because the scientific formation of mod- 
ern civilized man entirely desacralizes the world and petrifies it in the 
ghost of sheer, mute appearances. These appearances, along with knowl- 
edge of the kind discussed so far, make room only for the aesthetic and 
lyrical emotions of poets and artists, which obviously have no scientific 
or metaphysical value, being merely subjective experiences. 

The prevalent alibi of modern science is the claim to power; 
and that argument, in this context, deserves to be considered, since 
shakti as power, as well as siddhis (namely, powers), plays an 



14 



Knowledge and Power 

important role in Tantrism and related currents. Modern science 
offers the proof of its validity through the positive results achieved, 
particularly by putting at man's disposal such a power that has, so 
it is claimed, no precedents in previous civilizations. 
# We are dealing here with a misconception of the term power, 
since no distinction is made between a relative, external, inorganic, 
conditioned power and true power. Obviously, all the opportuni- 
ties offered by science and technology to people of the Kali Yuga 
are exclusively of the first type. Action produces results only be- 
cause it conforms itself to given laws, which scientific research has 
pointed out, laws that action presupposes and obeys to the letter. 
The effect, therefore, is not directly connected to man, to the Self, or 
to his free will, as to its cause; between action and result there is a 
series of intermediaries that do not depend on the Self, and that are 
necessary in order to achieve what one wants. It is not just a matter 
of devices and machines, but of laws, of natural determinism that 
could go this way or that way, unintelligible in its essence; such 
mechanical power, is, after all, precarious. 

In no way does it represent a possession of the Self, nor is it one 
of the Selfs powers. What has been said about scientific knowledge 
applies as well: it does not change the human condition, the existential 
situation of an individual, nor does it presuppose or require any 
transformation of that kind. It is rather something added on, superim- 
posed, which does not imply any self-transformation. No one claims 
that we show any real superiority when we are capable of doing this 
or that by availing ourselves of any technical means: we do not cease 
to be mere humans, not even as lords of atomic weapons who can 
disintegrate a planet by pushing a button. And worse yet, if as a 
consequence of any given cataclysm people living in the Kali Yuga 
were deprived of all their machines, in the greatest majority of cases 
they would probably find themselves in a worse predicament than 
uncivilized primitives do when facing the forces of nature and the 
elements. That is because machines and technology have atrophied 
their true strength. We may well say that modern man, by virtue of a 
diabolical mirage, has been seduced by the "power" he has at his 
disposal, and of which he is so very proud. 

That which does not depend on the laws of nature, but which 
rather bends, changes, and suspends them, is a different kind of 
power. It is a direct acquisition of a few superior beings. The 
condition for such power and for the real knowledge I previously 
mentioned lies in the removal of the human condition, that is, of 
the limit represented by what the Hindus call "physical Self 



15 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

(bhutatman, the elemental Self). The axiom of all yoga, of Tantric 
sadhana and analogous disciplines, corresponds to Nietzsche's say- 
ing "man is something that must be overcome," only taken more 
seriously. As is the case with initiation in a general sense, the 
human condition is not accepted as one's final destiny; it is intoler- 
able to be merely mortal. Overcoming the human condition, in the 
framework of such disciplines, is in various degrees the condition 
for authentic power, for the acquisition of siddhis. To be precise, 
these siddhis do not represent the goal (to consider them as such is 
often reputed to be a deflection), but rather they are the natural 
consequence of an achieved superior existential and ontological 
status. Far from being something added on or extrinsic, they are a 
characteristic of a spiritual superiority (it is interesting to notice 
that the term siddhis, besides "extraordinary powers," means "per- 
fections"). Therefore, they are always a personal achievement, and 
as such they cannot be transferred, nor are they "democratizable." 
There is a deep hiatus separating the traditional and the mod- 
ern world. The knowledge and powers pursued by the modern 
world are democratic, that is, available to anyone endowed with 
enough intelligence to achieve, through educational institutions, a 
knowledge of modern natural sciences. It is enough to gain through 
training a certain level of knowledge that does not involve the 
deepest nucleus of one's being in order to be able to correctly 
deploy technological means. A handgun will produce the same 
results in the hands of a lunatic, a soldier, or a great statesman; in 
the same sense, anyone can be transported in a few hours from one 
continent to another. We may well say that this "democracy" has 
been the leading principle in the systematic organization of modern 
science and technology. As we have seen, the real differentiation of 
beings is the condition for an inalienable knowledge and power, 
which cannot be transferred to others; they are exclusive and 
"esoteric," not artificially, but by virtue of their very nature. They 
represent exceptional peaks of achievement of which the whole of 
society cannot partake. What is open to society are only opportuni- 
ties of an inferior kind, precisely those that have been developed in 
the late Kali Yuga, in a civilization that has no correspondence with 
previous ones. In the context of traditional civilizations, besides 
these material opportunities (the paucity of which was due to the 
lack of interest people had in them), 4 artistic activities could be 
pursued by anyone who had any interest in them. Generally speak- 
ing, they were characterized by various ways of life essentially 
oriented toward higher planes of being. This spiritual climate has been 



16 



Knowledge and Power 

maintained in more than one area until relatively recent times. 

I thought it necessary, as a way of introduction, to expose these 
critical and theoretical principles in order to give the reader a sense 
of direction into the spiritual world we are about to enter. As we 
approach our subject matter, I will add two more considerations, 
the first, again, concerning the science of nature. As I have said, in 
the data furnished by common experience, modern science has 
found only the so-called first qualities, namely, extension and move- 
ment, to be useful for its own purposes. The so-called secondary 
qualities, such as the quality of things and phenomena, have been 
excluded as such and treated only from a psychological and subjec- 
tive point of view. In reality, however, no object or phenomenon is 
directly experienced through extension and movement only, but is 
rather perceived together with other qualities. In India, a qualita- 
tive-psychological physics has been developed, with "atoms" and 
"elements" that consider reality not merely under the species of 
extension and movement but rather according to various qualities 
corresponding to different senses; such are the mahabhuta, the 
paramanu, and the tanmantra. These principles of the natural order 
are not abstract speculations but rather potential objects of a direct 
experience, while at the same time they retain the value of explana- 
tory principles of the system on which the world is built. They can 
be perceived by the special faculties developed by yoga and by 
sadhana. Then we can see how there corresponds to them a mean- 
ing, a form of evidence or special enlightenment. 

The perfect, liminal degree, in higher knowledge, is that in 
which being is identified with knowing, in which the contraposition 
between subject and object, between I and not-I (which is found in 
every form of modern scientific knowledge, constituting its meth- 
odological premise) is finally removed. Jnana yoga, in its last stage, 
aims at achieving this state, called samadhi. But if instead of turning 
to Patanjali's Yoga-Sutras we turn to Tantric metaphysics, the es- 
sence or bottom line of everything is shakti, or power; hence the 
connection with the doctrine of siddhis, of superhuman powers. We 
can also read in it about an alleged process in the world in which 
Shakti, after becoming explicit in the realm of the not-I and conse- 
quently becoming obfuscated and unconscious, gradually awakens, 
acquires a conscious form (chidrupini- shakti), unites with her prin- 
ciple or "male partner" (Shiva), and finally becomes one with him. 
As we shall see, according to Tantric hatha yoga, this process is 
repeated inside the practitioner. It forms the basis of a doctrine of 
certainty. 



17 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

A Tantric commentator remarks that things are power and the 
"power of a thing does not wait for intellectual recognition." One 
may amuse oneself by calling the world an illusion, or think of it as 
unreal, but "karma, the force of action, will force him to believe in 
it." We can always ask of something, Why is it like this and not like 
something else? "In reality the Lord himself [Ishvara], would not 
elude these questions, which are the natural mark of ignorance." 5 . 
These problems come up as long as one remains in an extraneous 
or passive relationship with Shakti's manifestations in the world. 
These problems end, the Tantric author claims, only when the 
individual, because of sadhana, activates in himself the Shiva prin- 
ciple, that is, the radiant and dominating counterpart of the prime- 
val power. In him, there will then emerge a particular and 
suprarational kind of evidence and certainty, bound to a power. It 
is claimed concerning the fundamental requirement of practice: 
"Every Scripture is but a means. It is not useful to one who has not 
yet known the Devi [goddess = Shakti] and is not useful to one who 
has already known her." 6 After all, it is an Upanishadic theme that 
"into blind darkness enter they that worship ignorance; into dark- 
ness greater than that, as it were, they that delight in knowledge," 
and that those who have studied, upon attaining true knowledge, 
"throw away books as if they were on fire." 

The abovementioned polemical remark against those who think 
of the world as illusion was obviously aimed at that current of 
thought whose most extreme expression was represented by the 
Vedantic doctrine of Shankara. It is not meaningless, at this point, 
to see how that polemic was conducted. Vedanta claims that the 
only reality is that of the plain Absolute, in its formless and unde- 
termined aspect, the so-called nirguna-brahman. Everything else, the 
world and all its manifestations, is "false," a mere product of the 
imagination (kalpana), a mere appearance (avastu): here is the well- 
known and much-abused concept of maya, of the world as maya. A 
hiatus is thus established: nothing unites the real, brahman, with the 
manifestation, the world. Between them there is not even an antith- 
esis, since one is and the other is not. 

In the polemics carried on by the Tantras, their orientation 
toward concreteness is confirmed. It is true that from the point of 
view of the Absolute, the manifestation cannot exist in and by itself, 

o 

since there cannot be a being outside of Being. A question may be 
asked, however, as to what exactly is one who professes the doc- 
trine of maya: if he is Brahman itself or one of the beings that exist 
in the realm of maya. As long as one remains a human, namely a 



18 



Knowledge and Power 

finite and conditioned being, one certainly cannot be called nirguna- 
brahman, which is the unchanging pure Absolute without determi- 
nations and forms. Therefore, such a person cannot be but maya, 
since outside of nirguna-brahman one finds only maya. But if that 
person - the extremist Vedantist - in his existential reality, as a 
human, a jiva, a living being, is maya, then everything that he 
claims will be but maya (appearance and falsehood), including his 
theory according to which only nirguna-brahman is real while every- 
thing else is illusion and falsehood. 9 

This argument, which employs a subtle dialectic, is unexcep- 
tionable. Tantras say that the world as we know it may be maya 
from the point of view of brahman and of the siddha, one who has 
completely overcome the human condition. But such is not the case 
from the point of view of every finite consciousness, in the experi- 
ence of common people, to whom it is instead an indisputable 
reality that cannot be prescinded from. Until one perseveres in his 
condition, one is not authorized to call the world maya in the 
Vedantic sense of the word. In a commentary to the Isha-Upanishad, 
it is emphasized that by insisting on the doctrine of maya and on 
the absolute contradiction between the supreme principle and ev- 
erything that is determined and endowed with form, the very 
possibility of yoga and of sadhana would be compromised, since "it 
is impossible that something would be transformed into its own 
very contradiction." 10 

"We are mind and body: if mind and body (inasmuch as they 
belong to the world of maya) are false, how can one hope to achieve 
through them that which is true?" 11 Strictly speaking, the extremist 
Vedantic doctrine of maya would therefore deny to the individual 
the very possibility of elevating oneself toward the principle, since 
such a possibility presupposes that between these two no hiatus 
exists (a relationship between not-being and being), but rather a 
certain continuity. That is why, because of its concern to establish 
the necessary premises of yoga and, generally speaking, of sadhana, 
the practice leading to realization, and in order to prevent any 
contemplative escapism, Tantrism formulated a doctrine of the "ac- 
tive brahman" that is no less metaphysical than Vedanta's. Tantrism 
accomplished this by introducing the notion of Shakti and by re- 
shaping the maya theory. In the following pages we will mainly 
deal with that doctrine. 



19 



SHAKTI: 
THE WORLD AS POWER 



First of all, let us assess the new form that Tantric metaphysics 
assumed following the assimilation and transformation into a main 
hermeneutical principle of the ancient idea of the Devi, or Great 
Mother, who is conceived as the supreme deity. 

The starting point is represented by the acknowledgement that 
the principle and measure of every real being and form is a multi- 
form energy, an acting power that expresses itself in various ways. 
It is not a coincidence, as someone remarked, that the German word 
for reality, Wirklichkeit, comes from the verb wirken, "to act." This is 
also the case in Tantric metaphysics. With regard to power (shakti), 
even what we call "person" occupies an ontologically subordinated 
rank, including Ishvara, who is the God of theism. This radical 
version of Shaktism denies the existence of a principle "endowed" 
with power, yet distinct from it. The argument runs on these lines: 
"If everything exists in virtue of shakti, why look for its source? 
You feel the need to identify the principle or support on which 
shakti is based. Are you not then compelled to explain on what 
principle shakti foundation is based?" 1 

The similarities between Tantrism and older Hindu metaphysi- 
cal systems may easily be established as follows: These systems did 



20 



Shakti: The World as Power 

not stop at the concepts of "being" and "person." The counterpart 
of being (sat) is nonbeing (asat). Beyond both of them we find the 
Absolute (brahman, which is neuter, should not be confused with 
the name Brahma, which is masculine). Hindu metaphysics did not 
employ a theistic notion of "God," conceived as a person (Ishvara, 
Brahma, and analogous hypostases), as the ultimate reference point. 
Rather, brahman is something that transcends the personal deity 
and is thought of in terms of primordial and abyssal energy. The 
Tantric Shakti eventually came to be identified with it, but in the 
course of this process she lost all of her specifically feminine traits, 2 
since brahman is beyond the masculine/feminine differentiation. 
Shakti also lost the primacy she enjoyed as the feminine element, 
which is typical of ancient civilizations. That primacy derives from 
the capability of giving birth and from being thought of, in a cosmic 
context, as an incubating womb. Generating as well as creating are, 
however, still considered to be subordinated and partial functions, 
and Brahma's rather than brahman's prerogatives. 

Shakti is therefore characterized by the same attributes usually 
associated with brahman; nothing exists outside of her, since she is 
"one without a second" (advaya). All living beings find their origin, 
life, and purpose in her: "Thou art all power. It is by thy power that 
we are powerful." 

It is also said: 

Shakti is the root of every finite existence. The worlds are her 
manifestation; she supports them and one day they will be reab- 
sorbed into her. . . . She is the supreme brahman (Parabrahman). 
... She is the mother of all the gods; without Shakti they would 
cease to exist. 4 

She is called Paratpara, "supreme of the supreme," 5 that is, the 
brahman invoked in Hindu Brahman metaphysical tradition. She is 
the "eternal energy of him who sustains the universe" (vaish- 
navishakti), and in relation to the trimurti, the divine triad of Hindu- 
ism, it is said: 

It is by Thy [Shakti's] power only that Brahma creates, Vishnu 
maintains, and, at the end of things, Shiva destroys the universe. 
Powerless are they for this but by Thy help. Therefore it is that 
Thou alone are the Creator, Maintainer, and Destroyer of the 
world. 6 

And also: "Thou supportest everything, without being sup- 

21 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

"7 

ported yourself." Only Shakti is "pure," "naked": "Though having 

o 

a form, yet thou art always formless." 

In this context Shakti is given the name Parashakti, to empha- 
size that no other being or principle ranks higher than her. The 
ancient pre-Aryan understanding of Shakti as the magna mater, or 
mother of the gods - a sovereign divinity from whom every life and 
existence derives - undergoes a radical transformation as a conse- 
quence of the encounter with Aryan Upanishadic metaphysics. Shakti 
there becomes "she who dwells in everything in the form of power" 
(Shaktirupa). 

From the texts we gather a further, particularly relevant ele- 
ment. If we consider the principle of the universe merely in terms 
of primordial energy, we may be induced to think that its manifes- 
tation in the world is nothing but a random, centrifugal movement. 
That being the case, we would then be reminded of the notion of 
"life" as it is found in some Western irrationalist philosophies and 
even in Spinoza's pantheist system. According to Spinoza, the world 
proceeds eternally and almost necessarily from the substance of the 
godhead, in the same way that the properties of a triangle derive 
from its definition. In Tantrism, on the contrary, Shakti's manifes- 
tation is considered to be free. Since she is not bound by any 
external or internal laws, nothing forces her to become apparent: 
"Thou art power. Who could tell you what to do or not to do?" 9 
Since in human experience the ideal prototype of unrestrained 
action is play (lila), the Tantras do not hesitate to call Shakti's 
manifestation "play" and to say that (1) her essence is play (lilamayi- 
shakti); (2) her name is "playful," lalita; 10 and (3) the supreme Shakti's 
(Parashakti) solitary game finds expression in every form of mani- 
fested and conditioned existence, whether-human, subhuman, or 
divirierTantric symbolism merged with Shaivist symbols and even 
appropriated the theme of the dancing god, Nataraja. Dance is 
something free and uninhibited, representing the unfolding of the 
manifestation. It is no longer Shiva who engages in the dance, but 
the goddess Shakti, portrayed with a flaming halo to symbolize her 
properly productive aspect. 

As a natural consequence of this development, the theses of 
radical Shaktism, which reflected the goddess's ancient sovereignty 
and ontological priority, were subsequently articulated. This led to 
the assimilation of Sankhya's metaphysics and to the reappraisal of 
the maya doctrine during the same period in which Shankara had 
formulated it. 

Sankhya is a darshana 11 based on dualism. As its hermeneutic 



22 



Shakti: The World as Power 

principle it adopts an original duality, that of purusha and prakriti, 
corresponding to the masculine and feminine elements; spirit and 
nature, and consciousness and unconsciousness. The former is un- 
changeable, the latter is the principle of movement and of becom- 
ing. Sankhya meticulously excluded from the first element, purusha, 
anything that is not pure, impassive, or action-oriented. Creation 
derives from a peculiar connection of these two principles and from 
an action originated by purusha (called "catalysis" in chemistry) 
and determined just by its presence. The closest analogy I can think 
of comes from that Aristotelian doctrine which explains the world 
and its becoming in terms of motion and of the desire awakened in 
matter (ule = prakriti) by the nous, or "unmoved mover." Prakriti, 
as such, is thought of as an equilibrium of three powers (the so- 
called gunas, which I will discuss later). Purusha's reflection on 
prakriti breaks this equilibrium, and by virtue of an impregnating 
action it causes motion and thus prakriti's unfolding into the world 
of forms and phenomena, which is called samsara. Sankhya also 
contemplates a "fallen condition," corresponding to a fundamental 
notion found in both Hindu and Buddhist metaphysics, namely 
avidya, or ignorance. Purusha identifies with its own reflection in 
prakriti, the so-called elemental Self (bhutatman), thus forgetting it 
is "other" that is, the impassive being whose substance is pure 
light, or the "spectator": 

The immortal soul [atman] is like the "drop of water on the 
lotus leaf." This elemental soul verily is overcome by nature's 
[prakriti] qualities [gunas]. Now, because of being overcome, 
he goes on to confusedness; because of confusedness he sees 
not the blessed Lord [Parabrahman], the causer of action who 
stands within oneself [atma-stha]. Borne along and defiled by 
the stream of qualities, unsteady, wavering, bewildered, full of 
desire, distracted, this one goes on to the state of self-conceit 
(abhimanatva). In thinking "This is I" and "That is mine" he 
binds himself with his self as does a bird with a snare. . . . The 
person is not overcome. This elemental soul (bhutatman) is 
overcome (abhibhuta) because of its attachment to qualities. 12 

Sankhya lent its tenets to classical yoga, which indicated the 
way leading from prakriti to reintegration with a purely purushic 
state, which we may call "Olympian," or mukti (release). Yoga 
pointed the way by promoting detachment from consciousness and 
from the I (atman = purusha), and by neutralizing those modifica- 



23 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

tions (vritti) that are consciously believed to be one's own rather 
than proper to the other principle (prakriti). 

At this point we are not yet dealing with practical applications, 
but still with cosmological views. Let us proceed. Sankhya offers an 
explanation of the world, not in terms of pure spirit, or of pure 
nature, or as being immutable or in a process of becoming, but 
rather by introducing the purusha-prakriti dyad. These two prin- 
ciples become connected in various ways: following the loss of 
equilibrium of the gunas, prakriti, after being fertilized by purusha's 
reflection, "becomes" and grows in the manifested world of "names" 
and "forms" (namarupa is the classical Hindu designation for the 
differentiated universe) . 

The Tantric synthesis takes up this paradigm again and reap- 
praises it. Unlike the Sankhya system, purusha and prakriti are no 
longer conceived as an eternal, primordial duality, but rather as 
two differentiations or forms of Shakti. Shiva, the personal god now 
transformed into an impersonal metaphysical principle, corresponds 
to the former. Shakti corresponds to the latter, though in a limited 
sense, since she assumes the role of Shiva's counterpart, namely, 
that of the god's companion and bride; she is also believed to be his 
power (traditionally the term Shakti had the meanings of both 
"power" and "bride"). As it was the case in Sankhya, Shiva retains 
the attributes of "being," immutability, and the nature of atman, or 
conscious principle. On her part, Shakti retains the characteristics of 
movement and mutability. She is the source of productive activi- 
ties, generation, and vivification. While Sankhya spoke of "reflec- 
tion" and "action" in terms of pure presence, in the Tantric synthe- 
sis the idea of "fertilization" was widely accepted: the union of 
Shiva and Shakti is believed to generate the universe, with both its 
static and dynamic components, and with both its immaterial/ 
conscious and material/unconscious forms. The introduction of the 
purushic, or Shaivist element, discredits the idea that a radical 
version of Shaktism had upheld instead, namely, that the mani- 
fested world is the result of a wild outburst of an undifferentiated, 
elementary energy. 

Hindu Tantric iconography enhanced in various ways the au- 
thentic characteristics of the two principles. First, we may recall the 
icon of Shakti's dance over Shiva's outstretched and still body. In 
this instance, immobility represents the immutability of the male 
principle. According to the canons of Hindu religious art, his tall 
stature signifies the superior ontological status he enjoys vis-a-vis 
Shakti, who is in motion. Second, we may recall the symbolism of 



24 



Shakti: The World as Power 

the union between Shakti and Shiva (as well as of equivalent divini- 
ties in the Hindu and Tibetan pantheon) in viparita maithuna, namely, 
the sexual position in which the male sits still and the woman, 
wrapping her legs around him, undulates her body over him. We 
may recall at this point that Western "activistic" axioms operated 
an inversion of the traditional idea according to which the true 
male principle is characterized by "being." This principle does not 
act, since it is sovereign and capable of generating action without 
becoming involved with it. Therefore, everything that is action, 
dynamism, and development, by virtue of not being self-sufficient, 
is said to fall under the aegis of the feminine element, nature, or 
prakriti rather than under the aegis of spirit, atman, or purusha. It 
is an instance of active immobility versus passive activity. The 
activist Western world has forgotten these truths, and it is therefore 
ignorant of the meaning of true virility. 

In the period in which Tantnsm was developing the doctrine of 
the metaphysical dyad, the Vedanta system had already been out- 
lined in rather extreme terms by Shankara. I previously mentioned 
this in the context of a Tantric critique of Vedanta's version of mon- 
ism. Following the lead of the Upanishads, Shankara upheld in a 
rigorous way that whatever changes and is differentiated (kalatraya- 
sattva) cannot possibly be real. Considering that our experience of 
the world is not one of nirguna-brahman, namely, of an absolutely pure, 
impersonal, and solitary purusha, and considering that we live 
in a qualified, conditioned, and ever-changing world, Shankara con- 
cluded, as we have seen, that such a world is nothing but an illusion 
and a lie. As a result of this explanation, however, the problem is not 
solved but rather recast in different terms, since we still have to 
explain the source of this appearance, or fiction, and also how it 
came to be. Shankara therefore introduces the notion of maya, 
attributing to it the cause of solitary nirguna-brahman' 's dimming and 
of saguna-brahman's arising. The latter is thought of as brahman's 
manifestation and unfolding in a world of forms and conditioned 
beings, with Ishvara, the personal, theistic God, at the top. Maya is 
conceived as something that cannot be explored or grasped; it is 
enigmatic (anirvakya) and beyond imagination. The followers of Ve- 
danta claim that we cannot say that it either is (since maya is not 
pure being) or is not (since it acts and grows its roots in ordinary 
experience), nor that it both is and is not. Maya remains a mys- 
tery, something that is eminently irrational. Obviously, Shankara 
denied any relation between brahman and maya. 

All of this merely identifies, rather than solves, the main diffi- 



25 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

culty encountered by radical Vedantic monism. The dilemma can- 
not possibly be solved by leaving the realm of ontology in order to 
take refuge in the notion of "different perspectives." In ancient 
Greece Parmenides, who was concerned to safeguard the notion of 
pure being, formulated the theory of double-sided truth. He op- 
posed the truth characteristic of rigorous thought (nous), according 
to which "only being is," to the truth characteristic of opinion 
(doxa), which accounts for becoming and nature, all the while deny- 
ing to them ("according to justice") the status of "being." Likewise, 
Shankara opposes a secular, empirical perspective (vyavakarthika) to 
an absolute one (paramarthika). In the latter perspective maya does 
not exist. This means that achieving the enlightening knowledge 
that this view aspires to is contingent upon seeing maya disappear 
as if it were mist or a mirage, at which point one no longer needs 
to explain it. Maya is but a product of ignorance (avidya), a projec- 
tion of ignorance on the eternal and immutable being. 

Yet even now the difficulty remains unsolved, since we must 
ask how, generally speaking, ignorance and relative perspectives 
arise. We could find a solution if we were operating in the context 
of a creation theology typical of religions such as Christianity and 
Islam. Since theistic religionspostulate the existence of created 
beings (who are somehow separated from God, who is their prin- 
ciple, and therefore are not to be identified with Him), we could 
attribute to them the relative perspective that arises as a conse- 
quence of maya. Unfortunately, in Vedantic monism there is no 
place for such a notion. Its cardinal tenet is "brahman has no equals," 
namely, there is nothing outside of it, not even created beings that 
are subject to ignorance and to experiencing the world according to 
the illusion of maya. If we uphold Vedanta's Advaita monism, we 
are thereby forced to conclude that maya, in its irrational and 
miragelike nature, could mysteriously arise within brahman itself 
(since nothing exists other than it). This, in turn, would lead us to 
conclude that brahman itself is subject, in some way, to "ignorance." 
It is the only way out, but by choosing it, the radical Vedantic 
monism is fatally flawed. 

The following are some further Tantric criticisms. In a sense we 
may say that the world is not absolutely "real" and that maya, its 
source, is not totally unreal. A dream may be said to be unreal, but 
not the power that generates it. If maya is unreal, whence comes 
samsara, namely, the finite and ever-changing world? Somebody 
said: "If maya is unreal, samsara becomes real." This means that the 
unreality and contingency of phenomena and of becoming (samsara) 



26 



Shakti: The World as Power 

may be upheld only if it can be successfully demonstrated that they 
do not exist in and by themselves, but that they rather have their 
source and reason of being in a higher power. If one denies the 
existence of that power, in no way may the contingency and unre- 
ality of samsara be maintained. In such a case, samsara must be 
thought of as an external and autonomous reality, limiting and 
altering the supreme principle. According to the Tantras, the only 
solution to the problem consists in relating maya to a power, or 
Shakti. As an alternative to Vedanta's mysterious maya, the Tantras 
speak of maya-shakti, which is a manifestation of the supreme Shakti 
or Parashakti. They even appeal to an alternative meaning of maya, 
namely "magic" [maya yoga refers to a particular kind of yoga 
pursuing magical purposes). In this context the term designates a 
creative art producing real, effective results rather than the art 
creating tricks proper of illusionists and magicians. Once maya is 
reduced to maya-shakti, there is no further need to deny empirical 
reality and to consider everything as an illusion. 

In her freedom, and in virtue of being "playful," Shakti pro- 
duces the world of samsara and displays herself in it. Thus the 
unity of the supreme principle is preserved. It may rightfully be 
stated that: 

To form a concept of the Godhead that one worships, the idea of 
Shakti, or power, is for the devotee a surer guide than the nebu- 
lous idea of atman [spirit]. It is very hard for those who have no 
faith in Shakti to trace the "one without a second" through the 
physical to the spiritual plane of existence, there being no appre- 
ciable link to chain the planes together. But a worshiper of Shakti 
need contend with no such difficulty. In all planes of existence 
he finds the one power all-pervading. It is therefore laid down 
in the Tantras: "O Devi! without a knowledge of Shakti, mukti 
[liberation] is mere mockery!" 

Again, it is not a matter of affirming or denying that various 
things are "unreal." One should rather ask: "To what degree can 
you make a single blade of grass 'unreal' (that is, not existing in 
itself, which implies a power over it)?" Whatever exists does not 
cease to exist at one's whim or thought. The power of action would 
dissuade anybody from pursuing such fancies: 

Until brahman is perceived to be everywhere, and until the chains 
of the laws of nature are broken and the distinction between the 
I and the not-I is abolished, the particular living being [jiva] will 



27 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

doubt this dualistic universe and call it a lie, a dream, and so on. 
Eventually, the efficiency of karma, namely, the power of action, 
will force the jiva to believe in it, against his or her will. 14 

Speculative Tantrism, which does not share creationist per- 
spectives, developed a metaphysics suitable for the sadhaka, one 
who is committed to the path of spiritual realization. This meta- 
physics overcomes both Sankhya's dualism of purusha and prakriti 
as well as the dualism between brahman and maya that Vedanta 
unsuccessfully attempts to eliminate. Dualism is substituted, in this 
context, with a dyad typical of every free manifestation. Thus we 
may talk about an "immanent transcendence," corresponding to 
Shiva, or better, to the Shiva form of the supreme principle. All the 
powers found in reality have their roots in him, who is both their 
culmen et fans. Shiva is called the "naked one" (digambaram, namely, 
free of determinations) and at the same time "he whose body fills 
the entire universe." Shiva is portrayed, in a symbolism closely 
related to Tantric ethics, as one who, while immersed in the vortex 
of passions, remains free and in control of them. He is the master 
of eroticism, yet he remains free of lust. Although he always be- 
comes associated with various forms, energies, and powers, he is 
nevertheless eternally free, invulnerable, and attributeless. The ele- 
ments that in Shakti's cosmic play appear to be differentiated still 
do not affect the immanent unity of her Shiva form. Even what 
is finite and unconscious derives from consciousness, as the by- 
product of maya-shakti, which is not unconscious in itself. It is 
important to notice that finitude no longer constitutes a problem 
whenever it is related to a power determining it. 

This context may be further clarified when we consider the 
meaning assumed by Shakti's manifestation and the "movements" 
through which she displays herself. While a particular power may 
be focused on any object, the supreme Shakti has only herself to 
display, since outside of her, by definition, nothing else exists. In a 
Tantra it is written: "You are your own birth place; in and for 
yourself you have become manifested." 

This manifestation still implies a "proceeding from" (prasarati), 
a centrifugal movement "coming out from" a state of static stability 
and "self-projecting." It corresponds to the first movement origi- 
nated in the feminine substance by the fertilizing action of the 
motionless Shiva, or purusha. Incidentally, it is analogous to what, 
in Aristotelian metaphysics, is responsible for awakening the form- 



28 



Shakti: The World as Power 

less power of "nature." The texts refer to an "inwardly cognitive 
state" (bahir-mukha) and also consider phenomena to be Shakti's 
bursting forth and projecting herself outward, under the influence 
of a desire or elementary yearning, or of a cosmogonic Eros aimed 
at creating an object in which to find delight. This phase is called 
pravritti-marga, "the way of determinations," of "finite forms" (vritti), 
which are generated and assimilated by Shakti. In this "descend- 
ing" phase, Shakti's role is one of negation, since the manifested 
forms are just partial possibilities of the unmanifested principle 
resting in itself. It is also said that maya-shakti is a "measuring 
power," since it creates determinations or delimitations correspond- 
ing to various beings and to various forms of existence. Ignorance, 
or avidya, is inherent to power, since it is an "outwardly cognitive 
state," contemplating something other than itself, which is proper 
to the yearning and identifying movement of the objectification 
process. 

That process eventually comes to an end. After a descending 
phase of the manifestation comes an ascending one: thus the circle 
is complete. The power must eventually recognize itself in every- 
thing that is differentiated, turned into an object, an "other," by 
maya-shakti. The process must also be consummated in a possession, 
since the Shaivistic element must prevail again over the purely 
Shaktic element and bring it back to itself with all of its produc- 
tions. Following the centrifugal movement comes a centripetal one; 
that is, an inner detachment ensues the "outwardly cognitive state," 
which was characterized by a passionate attachment to those ob- 
jects produced by maya-shakti's magic (the so-called nivritti-marga as 
opposed to pravritti-marga). In the first phase Shakti prevailed over 
Shiva and almost absorbed him into her own nature. Now it is the 
other way around. Shiva takes control of Shakti and makes her 
subject to himself, until an absolute, transparent unity is achieved. 

The Hindu Tantras of the Northern School (Kashmir) conveyed 
this notion through these words: "Shakti is like a pure mirror 
through which Shiva experiences himself." 15 This resembles 
Hegel's notion of "absolute spirit," which first exists "in itself," 
then becomes an object unto itself, and eventually comes to 
recognize itself in objective forms that exist "in and for itself." This 
also reminds us of analogous schemata found in Western idealist 
philosophies, especially when we consider that a commentary 
on the text previously referred to speaks of the I or "I-ness" in a 
transcendental sense, or as the essence of the highest experience of 
Shakti one could possibly achieve. 



29 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

The same idea is expressed through a conventional analysis of 
the word for "I," aham. The first letter in the Sanskrit alphabet, a. 
represents Shakti. The last letter, ha, represents Shiva. The formula 
of the manifestation is not just a or ha, but rather a + ha, aham, which 
is "I" according to the abovementioned meaning of active self- 
identification, mediated by Shakti, as if through a mirror. The "I- 
ness" is therefore the supreme word, which includes all the phe- 
nomena and the entire universe, which in the doctrine of mantras 
(on mantra- shastr a, see Chapter VIII) is symbolized by the letters 
between a and ha. 16 Likewise, in Tibetan Buddhism the various 
powers of the manifestation are ascribed to various parts of the 
sacred syllable AUM, which in Tibetan too means "I." This is the 
meaning of the cosmic act of Parashakti, in which a whole world of 
forms and of finite beings is displayed. A movement ensues in 
which "duality is dissolved into unity, only to unfold again in the 
dualistic play." In this movement "brahman, which is perfect con- 
sciousness [we are dealing here with the Tantric version of the 
active brahman], generates the world in the form of maya consisting 
of qualities [gunas], and then takes the part of a particular living 

1 7 

being [jiva] in order to fulfill its cosmic play." The same principle 
that achieves the supreme experience of the "inwardly cognitive 
state" experiences the world as samsara through an "outwardly 
cognitive state." 

In regard to the various ages in which the manifestation took 
place, a relationship is established between them and the doctrine 
of the two ways (Right Hand versus Left Hand) in the following 
terms. The creative and productive aspect of the cosmic process is 
signified by the right hand, by the color white, and by the two 
goddesses Uma and Gaud (in whom Shakti appears as Praka- 
shatmika, "she who is light and manifestation" 1. The second aspect, 
that of conversion and return (exitus, reditus), is sienified by the left 
hand, by the color black, and by the dark, destructive goddesses 
Durga and Kali Thus according to the Mahakala-Tantra, when the 
left and right hands are in equilibrium we experience samsara, but 
when the left hand prevails, we find liberation. 

A further interpretation of Kali's role is found in popular ico- 
nography. There Kali appears black and naked, wearing only a 
necklace of severea heads. Under this aspect the goddess is Shiva's 
shakti, namely, his power of active transcendence. The color black 
represents transcendence over any manifested and visible thing. 
According to a" well-received etymology of the word, her name is 
Kali, since she devours time, "becoming." and progress, which 



30 



Shakti: The World as Power 

constitute the law of samsaric existence. Her nakedness symbolizes 
her being free of forms. The fifty heads she wears around her neck 
(which""in popular mythology belong to slain demons) are made to 
correspond to the fifty letters of the Sanskrit alphabet, which in 
turn symbolize the various cosmic powers presiding over the mani- 
festation (matrika, which Greek speculation identified as logoi 
spermatikoi). The heads allude to those powers because they are 
removed from Their elementary nature, proper to the descending 
phase. Therefore, if the role of maya-shakti's power in the Tantras is 
one of negation, then Kali's role, in the aspect so far considered, 
may be said to be "a negation of the negation/Here we begin to 
witness the self-destructive and self-transcending orientation of a 
power that in Tantrism plays a considerable role, especially in the 
context of Left Hand practices and rituals. 

"To destroy" and "to transcend" should be seen mainly in 
terms of (1) going beyond manifested and conditioned forms, and 
(2) getting rid of the habit of identifying oneself with external 
forms, whether human or cosmic. The "destruction" considered 
here concerns the elements of "desire" and of "enslaving fascina- 
tion with the self." It is considered a matter of secondary impor- 
tance if, at an individual or social level, this attitude may eventu- 
ally require severing relationships and personal attachments. When 
we talk about the process of destruction at work in the multiform 
world of nature, we should not confuse it with Kali's attributes, 
since they serve the transcendental purpose of leading "upward" 
and beyond (this, incidentally, is the Latin etymology of the word 
transcendence). That is why in a Tantric hymn Kali is presented 
under that particular Shaktic form in which she picks up what 
preceded her. In this context, the term employed to describe her 
action is vikvasamghera. In it, Shiva's power, or shakti, is clearly 
manifested. 

Traditional Hindu cosmology knew the theory of the emana- 
tion and reabsorption (pralaya) of the worlds, which obey cyclical 
laws. Such a theory should not be confused with what was previ- 
ously discussed. It is inappropriate to speak of two ages, times, or 
phases, if those terms are interpreted in a temporal sense, as if they 
were consecutive stages in a temporal series. In this second age, we 
still do not find an elimination or disintegration of the current 
order. What we find is only a change of polarity and an experience 
of being as "formless yet endowed with every form" and as "it 
appears at the same time, with forms and without forms" (ruparupa- 
prakasa), which is what Tantrasara claims. Under the aegis of Shakti, 



31 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

who is now reduced to her principle, and of the implementation of 
that principle, "the world and samsara remain and become the true 
place where liberation may take place" (according to the Kularnava- 
Tantra's formulation). In this fashion, Tantrism agrees with that 
peculiar truth found in Mahayana Buddhism according to which 
nirvana and samsara are identical and coextensive. This truth will 
also find expression in the Zen experience of satori. 

It is necessary at this time to add a couple of references taken 
from the Upanishadic tradition, in the hope that they will clarify 
what I have expounded so far. 

Let us adopt as a reference point the atman, or spiritual Self, 
The Upanishads mention four possible states of the Self in regard 
to the manifestation. In the first which is that of consciousness 

expe rienced during wakefulness, th e world appears under the 
of exteriority. In the second, it is perceived under the species of 
productive shaktis (tajasa). Their experience is possible only if one 
elevates the Self, still operating at a level of consciousness, to a 
superconscious" dimension that in ordinary people's lives corre- 
sponds to the chaotic life of dreams. In the third stage, prajna, the 
world of these energies is seen as one; it is perceived in the function 
of its unity, and personified by Ishvara on the religious plane. One 
arrives at such a stage when the ego plunges into that ultimate 
depth which ordinary people experience as dreamless sleep. .The 
law of cause and effect applies only during the first two stages. In 
the third stage there are only principles in the form of pure causes. 
Finally, a fourth stage is contemplated, called turiya. We say "fourth" 
in an improper manner, since it follows the other three only from 
sadhana's and yoga's perspective. By itself, ontologically speaking, 
this stage resumes and transcends all the previous three. Here is the 
level of "selfhood" in which the world of manifestations is con- 
sumed. When describing the turiya stage, the Upanishads say that 
"it destroys the entire phenomenic world" by "devouring Ishvara 
as a self-subsistent being." 19 

Another reference is found in the Nrisimha-Uttara-Tapanya- 
Upanishad. Atman, the one and only, during the first stage is 
"contained" (ati), or embodied, in the material of its experience. 
This, in a Tantric perspective, corresponds to the function of maya- 
shakti. During the second stage atman exists as Anyatri, "he who 
affirms": "Atman affirms this world by donating to it its own being; 
it affirms its own self [as the I of the world] since the world is self- 
less." There is another expression designating this stage: "it says 
yes (aum) to the whole world," thereby "giving substance to a 



32 



Shakti: The World as Power 

world that does not have one." The external reality is thus seen as 
a projection of the spiritual principle's reality, which "affirms" the 
world. In the third stage experience is simply anujna, namely, pure 
affirmation without a subject or person. This force is then overcome 
and what follows is the supreme stage, a reference point unto itself 
called avikalpa. Here atman "knows and knows not," which is an- 
other way of saying that it does not know according to knowledge 
that implies an objectification, or "something else," since knowledge 
in this context refers to something "simple," anubhuti. "Atman both 
differs and does not differ from becoming." It is itself "under all the 
forms of being from which it differs." Hence the following view, 
which is identical to the "perfect knowledge" (prajnaparamita) of 
Mahayana Buddhism: "Truly there is neither disappearing nor be- 
coming. There is nobody who binds, or who acts, or who needs 
liberation, or who is liberated" 

Aside from these metaphysical insights concerning the nature 
of the world, the bottom of the descending or the extroverted 
process is represented by the material objectivity of the world itself, 
that is, by physical "matter." In matter, the extreme form of "think- 
ing the other" is found in a condensed state. Both the Chandogya- 
Upanishad and the Gandharva-Tantra speak of the self-hypnotic 
and magical power whereby an object's thought generates itself 
and is transformed into it. Consciousness, by thinking "other," 
namely, a distinct reality, and by following the law of craving, 
eventually generates "other" and becomes other. Matter therefore is 
the experience and the symbol of a self-identification carried to its 
extreme consequences. Only ignorance arising out of desire and 
self-identification (may a- shakti as kamarupini), which takes place 
during the outward phase, makes nature appear to be actual. In the 
West, Meister Eckhart wrote that even a stone is God, except it does, 
not know it. It is precisely the lack of awareness of being God 
(avidya) that causes it to be a stone. This is also the case of that 
particular phase of the manifestation in which Shakti prevails: na- 
ture is then perceived not as a self-subsistent reality but rather as 
a magical/cosmic participation in an idea, in a state of being. We 
would not perceive nature in these terms if there were in us no 
maya-shakti, which is a similar function at work in our being. 

Beyond the limits of nature, the steps of the ascending process - 
which correspond to degrees of awakening and of knowledge 
(vidya) - are reflected in the hierarchy of beings under the aspect of 
objectifications and cosmic symbols. 

Once these beings overcome the dark passions of matter and 



33 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

break free from the control of their inferior and prehuman nature, 
they will arise in forms animated by an increasingly conscious and 
free life. The corresponding limit is the state in which the spirit no 
longer exists in the form of an object or an "other" (under the 
species of "otherness"), but rather as it is in itself (atmasvarupi). In 
it. Shakti, instead of being a binding principle, manifests herself as 
Tara, "she who imparts freedom." Thanks to her, even what seems 
imperfect and finite now looks perfect and absolute. 

From an immanent point of view, the experience in terms of 
nature and matter of what corresponds, metaphysically speaking, 
to a series of stages of the one and only spiritual reality, depends 
on each individual's degree of avidya. It constitutes maya-shakti's 
action in him. However, Shiva, the subject and lord of this function, 
dwells as a principle in everybody. He is the same supreme power 
that is experienced in a given aspect of the cosmic play, and he is 
as he chooses to be One can only remain passive before maya- 
shakii and be unable to assume it and reduce it to its principle. That 
is the only reason why the original Shakti cannot be found free and 
wholesome in every form and aspect of reality, and also why the 
world is not experienced as release, according to the Kularnava- 
Tantra's formulation and Mahayana Buddhism's deepest insight. 

More specifically, a peculiar encounter or dynamic connection 
between maya-shakti and shiva-shakti must be acknowledged in ev- 
ery form and being of the universe. The supreme synthesis may be 
compared to a flame that, after consuming the matter from which 
it was kindled, has finally become pure energy or pure act. With 
respect to that synthesis, every particular finite existence is charac- 
terized by a certain inadequacy of the two principles and by differ- 
ent degrees of power. According to Tantric metaphysics, material- 
ity, unconsciousness, conditioned beings, and maya (in the Vedantic 
sense of the word) all have their roots in these various degrees. In 
every finite being, the two primordial forms of Parashakti (male 
and female; Shiva, who is "knowledge," and Shakti, who is "igno- 
rance"; centrifugal and centripetal movement) are found in a differ- 
ent relationship and quantity. According to this point of view, 
whatever power is to be found in a given being that has not yet 
become actualized in the form of Shiva is said to be Shakti. Shiva 
or shiva-shakti is instead identified with whatever is unified, trans- 
formed, transparent, and luminous. More specifically, matter, body, 
and soul correspond to the former, the atman element to the latter. 
In any event, in Tantrism both of them are considered to be simply 



34 



Shakti: The World as Power 

two different manifestations of the same principle, of the same 
reality. 

Since the union of Shiva and Shakti in both states of existence 
is not perfect and absolute as in the level reached by the supreme 
synthesis, the spirit therefore experiences its own power as shakti 
and as maya-shakti, or as something different, even as a phantasm of 
the external world. The nature of finite beings consists in being 
dominated by shakti rather than by dominating it. According to the 
Tantras the difference between Ishvara (God, in theistic Hinduism) 
or Shiva and the finite living being, jiva, is that despite their being 
both conjoined to maya and metaphysically the same thing, the 
former dominates maya, while the latter is dominated by it. 

To sum up what has been discussed in this chapter, we may 
conclude that the Tantras state the intention of reconciling a tran- 
scendental truth, namely, monism, or the Upanishadic doctrine of 
nonduality (Advaita), with the truth proper to every living being's 
dualistic and concrete experience. This reconciliation is accom- 
plished by thinking of brahman as an actual unity of Shiva and 
Shakti, which are two principles superseding Sankhya's purusha 
and prakriti. The notion of shakti is what mediates between the I 
and the not-I, the conditioned and the unconditioned, the conscious 
spirit and nature, the mind and the body (physis), and the will and 
reality. This notion brings those apparently antithetical principles 
into a higher transcendental unity, whose implementation is of- 
fered to man as a real possibility. In the Kularnava-Tantra (1:110) 
Parashakti says: "In the world some desire nondualistic, others 
dualistic knowledge, but those who have known my truth have 
passed beyond dualism and nondualism." 



35 



IV 



THE DOCTRINE 

OF THE TATTVAS: 

THE HUMAN CONDITION 



Aside from a general view of the manifestation, speculative Tantrism 
espouses the doctrine of tattvas, which it borrowed, for the most 
part, from the Sankhya and Vedanta systems. The term tattva has 
various meanings. In the present context, it may be translated as 
"principle" or "element." The abstruse doctrine of tattvas deals 
with the various articulations of the manifestation. I find it neces- 
sary to expound this teaching, since Tantrism explains our consti- 
tution and experiences in terms of it. The "doctrine of the elements" 
also plays a key role in practice (sadhana) and in yoga. 

On the one hand, ontologically speaking, tattvas are the prin- 
ciples of nature. On the other hand, they are states, or forms, of 
experience. As far as their unfolding is concerned, I must repeat 
what has been said about the two great "eons" of the manifestation, 
namely, that a development in time should be ruled out, since the 
temporal dimension appears and is established only at a later level 
of the tattvas' unfolding. The total process includes stages exempt 
from temporal limitations as well as stages in which time does not 
have its current meaning: 

When we speak of the order of development of the possi- 
bilities of manifestation, or of the order in which elements corre- 

36 



The Doctrine of the Tattvas: The Human Condition 

sponding to the different phases of this development should be 
enumerated, great care must be taken to specify that such an order 
implies a purely logical succession, signifying, moreover, a real on- 
tological connection, and that there cannot here be any sort of ques- 
tion of a temporal succession. In fact, development in time corre- 
sponds only to a special condition of existence, one of those which 
define the domain in which the human state is contained; and there 
is an indefinite multitude of other modes of development equally 
possible, and equally included within the universal manifestation. 1 

A modern Tantric pandita, P. N. Mukyopadhaya, has compared 
the tattvas to the image of what appears as a consequence of 
shifting around various parts of a whole; they coexist in a hierarchy 
of constantly interchanging functions. 

It is worthwhile to emphasize again the relativity of the law of 
time, which appears only at a given stage of the tattvas' develop- 
ment, mainly because this relativity allows us to solve various 
problems raised by practical philosophy. For instance, it renders 
obsolete the question of how a passage of the preexistent Absolute 
to the realm of finitude may have taken place, since the Absolute 
does not exist in a spatio-temporal sense. Conversely, it is absurd 
to locate the Absolute at the end of a temporal sequence of various 
degrees in the process of realization. At the samsaric level in which 
it first appears, time is virtually indefinite, without end. Thus Bud- 
dhism may claim that no ongoing organic process will ever lead to 
the end of the world (= liberation). Therefore, Buddhist "realism" is 
opposed to evolutionist fancies. The Absolute cannot be reached 
by following a "horizontal" path, but only by following an extra- 
temporal "vertical" path and by escaping the temporal condition 
characterized by the notions of "before" and "after." 

The Tantras of the Northern School (Kashmir) recognize thirty- 
six tattvas, which are divided in three groups: pure (shudda-tattva); 
pure and impure (ashudda- shudda-tattva); and impure (ashudda-tattva). 
Impurity in this context refers to the degree to which something 
alien, or something of a different nature (idam), is found in the 
corresponding level of each group. According to this distinction, 
however, even shudda-tattvas are somehow impure, since only the 
supreme synthesis is, properly speaking, absolutely pure. This syn- 
thesis cannot be included in the series because it is the foundation 
and the substance of each tattva. It is called parasamvid, a supreme, 
omniscient power, and it needs to be considered aside from the real 
tattvas. This synthesis is also designated as a state in which Shakti 
"enjoys herself" (svarupavishranti) and as the I's self-knowledge. 

37 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

This Shakti "is both immanent in and transcends the thirty-six 
tattvas and is by herself alone." 

From a cosmological point of view, the three groups of tattvas 
can be compared to the "three worlds" of the Hindu tradition: the 
world without forms (arupa); the world of pure forms (rupa); and 
the material world. The worlds correspond to the essential, subtle, 
and crude states of the manifestation. The groups may also be 
related to the first three states of atman's existence, which I previ- 
ously mentioned (in this case the fourth state, turiya should Be seen 
as parasamvid's complement). From the point of view of the produc- 
tive shakti, in the Tantras, these groups match the sleep state, 
dream stat e, and waking state. Once shakti awakens, the process 
unfolds until it produces the mos t dista nt form of "otherne ss," 
consisting in a dualistic opposition between t he I and the not-I. At 
this point, on tologically speaking, the tattvas development comes 
to an end. The new series, which is exactly the same as the previous 
one (this time traveled in reverse), is characterized by the lack of 
creative productions originating from the demiurgic shakti's desire, 
and also by states in which otherness and all forms of dualism are 
gradually overcome. In other words, they are states typical of yogic 
and of initiatory knowledge, usually encountered beyond the sen- 
sory perceptions of wakefulness. 

We must now consider the tattvas' unfolding until they reach 
the level of absolute duality. We will also explore the ascending 
phase leading to a perfectly developed human condition. Ordinary 
states of consciousness will be discussed in the following chapters 
of this book, dealing with practice (sadhana). Practice is not con- 
cerned with metaphysical interpretations of reality, but rather with 
the tasks and the realizations that one can accomplish only by 
going "countercurrent" and by transforming oneself. 

1. The first two tattvas beyond parasamvid are shiva and shakti, 
which are two distinct principles, but at this level still inseparably 
connected, whence the symbolism of their sexual union. There is 
a Tantric saying according to which in every manifestation "there 
is no shiva without shakti, or shakti without shiva." This is not 
yet the absolute, transcendent unity of the two (parasamvid) but 
rather the immanent and dynamic unity of the manifestation. At 
this level we find the principle of differentiation at work, whereby 
shiva and shakti are considered separately, as the first two tattvas. 

2. After having been fertilized by the shiva principle, Shakti 
awakens. What ensues is no longer a state in which an immobile 
being, made of pure light, rests in itself, but rather a state in which 



38 



The Doctrine of the Tattvas: The Human Condition 

the spirit is the object of perception and enjoyment. At first, Shakti's 
awakening somehow implies a negation of being, in the sense of an 
endless sinking into a self-accepting and self-concerned subjectiv- 
ity. This is the primordial root of concupiscence, and the original 
cosmic "sensation" that determines the negation alluded to by the 
Tantric principle "Shakti's function is one of negation." Ancient 
Greece knew the myth of Narcissus, which the neoplatonic tradi- 
tion employed in its own version of the metaphysical interpretation 
of reality. The act of Narcissus staring at his own image may 
symbolize the departing from the state of being, and the becoming 
lost in self-observation, self-perception, and self-love (the Sanskrit 
term nimesha, "closing the eyes," is given to Shakti in reference to 
her self-perception). This is the level of the third tattva, called 
sadakya or nada, which means "sound." Here nada is defined both as 
the first movement produced an3 as the primordial motus that 
originated this dissociation. 

3. Therefore, the being that has become the object of knowl- 
edge, of desire and, of observation, ceases to be aham ("I") and 
instead becomes idam ("this"), in a sort of cosmic fall. This marks 
the rise of the original element of objectivity, or otherness, as a 
function of looking "upward." This process, in which Shakti opens 
her eyes, is referred to as unmesha. The corresponding tattva is 
called bindu-tattva and ishvara-tattva. On the religious plane, Ishvara, 
as I previously remarked, corresponds to the God of theism presid- 
ing over the manifested world. One may properly speak of ishvara- 
tattva if by the term "other" (idam) one refers to the collective 
possibilities of the manifestation that are encompassed in a larger 
unity: hence the other term, bindu, which literally means "dot." It is 
a nondimensional dot, encompassing plurality in itself, though in a 
transcendental way. (Parabindu means the "supreme source.") One 
text says that at the level of this tattva we find a "condensation" 
(ghanibhuta) of power. 4 Here the powers of the manifestation form 
a unity, which is the image of the I's (aham) substance in the form 
of idam, "thisness." Therefore, one could draw a parallel with the 
chemical notion of precipitation. At this level, the "other" is still 
totally compenetrated by aham, the I, and is subsumed in the tran- 
scendent "dot," that is, the dwelling point of Ishvara, who is the 
Lord of the Manifestation. 

4. Duality as such is found in the following level (Sadvidya), 
since it constitutes a development of the previous state. Object and 
subject now face each other and are, so to speak, in full equilibrium 
(samanadhikarana). Hence the title of "pure knowledge" (shuddha- 



39 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

vidya) is sometimes given to this tattva, referring to this transpar- 
ency, which is still connected to a generic dual principle. The 
saying "All this [the universe] is nothing but my manifestation" 
refers to the Ishvaric consciousness, in which the principle of differ- 
entiation does not succeed in abolishing identity. 

This marks the end of the pure tattvas' series. Next I would like 
to consider the semipure tattvas, which include maya-shakti and the 
five kankukas. 

5. Because of maya-shakti, differentiation prevails over iden- 
tity, and the content of experience becomes autonomous. The trans- 
parency of universal "pure knowledge," as well as bindu (the tran- 
scendental dot that includes all the possibilities of the manifesta- 
tion), is now broken down into the three relatively distinct as- 
pects of knower, known, and knowledge. Bindu, through the dyad 
(maya), becomes a triad, the so-called triple point, tribindu. This is 
the general scheme or archetype of every finite experience. 

At this level a split occurs, as in the case of a person standing 
between two mirrors, whose every movement would be repro- 
duced in two distinct yet perfectly identical images. On the one 
hand, we have the spiritual series under the aegis of the Shaivist 
principle. On the other hand, we have the real or material series 
under the aegis of the Shaktic principle. 

Here it is necessary to mention the gunas. We previously learned 
that in the Sankhya system the gunas are the three powers consti- 
tuting prakriti and operating in Shakti's productions. In Tantric 
metaphysics, which does not consider prakriti a self-subsistent prin- 
ciple, the gunas assume a different meaning. They correspond to 
various modalities of shakti, which come into play once the on- 
going process has led one beyond the metaphysical "point," that is, 
beyond ishvara-tattva. The three gunas are called sattva, rajas, and 
tamas. Sattva comes from the word sat, which means "being." The 
term designates the elements reflecting the stable and luminous 
nature of being, and it is usually associated with Shiva's nature. 
Tamas, on the contrary, denotes what is fixed in the opposite sense 
of a stiffening, or of an automatism (e.g., passive staticity, sheer 
passivity, the force of inertia, weight, mass, a limiting and obscur- 
ing power). Tamas presides over every depleted process and over 
inactive potentialities. Rajas, conversely, symbolizes dynamism, 
becoming, transformation, change, and expansion; it corresponds to 
what we usually designate as energy, life, or activity. Rajas may 
also be influenced by the other two principles. On the one hand,' 
when it is influenced by sattva, rajas appears in the guise of an 



40 



The Doctrine of the Tattvas: The Human Condition 

ascending and ever-expanding force, in virtue of which a given 
form or being becomes and develops. On the other hand, when it 
is influenced by tamas, rajas appears as the force acting in the 
processes of alteration, fall, and dissolution. The variety of the 
world's beings and forms derives from the dynamic and constant 
interaction of the three gunas, which are constantly undergoing 
transformation and-change. Therefore, in several Hindu doctrines 
the gunas are adopted as reference points not only by the science of 
nature (the final result being a qualitative physics similar to that 
promoted by Aristotle) but also by classifications according to types 
and characters. Differences among beings are caused by the various 
ways in which the three gunas relate. Because of the three gunas' 
interaction the purushic principle appears in the manifested world 
under various forms. 

The state described by the Sankhya system in which there is no 
longer any becoming, since the gunas are in perfect equilibrium, 
corresponds to the last of the pure tattvas of Tantric metaphysics. 
This tattva is found at the level in which the entire manifestation is 
essentially and transparently subsumed in a great source point, the 
so-called parabindu. The source point, or bindu, corresponds to the 
loss of the gunas' equilibrium, which according to Sankhya origi- 
nates the development of the world. At the end of the tattvas of this 
second group, or when maya's splitting function takes effect, itjs 
possible to begin to recognize two parallel manifestations of the 
gunas in both the spiritual and the material planes of reality. In 
other words, the gunas play an active role as qualifying powers 
both in the men tal sph ere and in the natural world of matter. 

6. If t ribindu and the various appearances of this triad in the 
order of the manifestation represent the development of what is 
contained synthetically, essentially, and transparently in the bindu- 
tattva, then likewise, the kankukas represent the deployment and the 
making explicit of what is contained in maya-shakti. As we have 
previously learned, the arising of the experience of idam, or of the 
other, is caused by maya-shakti. We also considered that otherness 
entails finitude, as well as the existence of particular forms, since it 
exists merely as a part of the whole. Therefore, at this level, what 
was once the object of a unitary, atemporal, and simultaneous 
experience now breaks down into a multiplicity, a heterogeneity, 
and a sequence. The kankukas are those transcendental powers pre- 
siding over this limited process. Kankuka literally means "sheath" 
or "covering," in reference to the power that veils and hides being. 
Kankukas also refer to the principles of individuation and determi- 



41 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

nation. They incorporate that particular measuring function, typical 
of maya, which is responsible for "carving out" and for isolating 
distinct forms from a spiritually homogeneous reality. 

The first kankuka is time (kala), understood as the universal 
form of the elements found in a sequence. Atman, or the purushic/ 
Shaivist principle, will never fully identify with particular and 
finite forms proper to a given state of existence. Therefore, atman 
is led from one experience to another. It eventually creates a surro- 
gate for that totality, which it no longer encompasses at the same 
time. Atman creates this surrogate in time, or in the course of an 
endless fragmentation of the finite. Therefore, every state appears 
to be insufficient, or in need of something else through which its 
development may be brought to an end. This constitutes the mani- 
festation of the second kankuka, called raga (literally, "passion" or 
"attachment"). Once the fullness or wholeness proper to bindu- 
tattva falls short, the finite consciousness is existentially attracted 
toward different objects, thus originating a temporal succession and 
the process of becoming. This consciousness is caught in a web of 
dependencies, which for the most part derive from causality and 
irreversibility, especially if we consider that every point in time is 
conditioned by two factors: the previous one, from which it pro- 
ceeds, and the following one, toward which it orients itself, out of 
an unconscious yearning for the Absolute. The more this system of 
interdependent conditionings unfolds, the more complex it becomes. 
One may refer here to the opinion according to which action (karma) 
generates ignorance (avidya), which in turn generates more karma, 
and so on. 5 The point being made is that the state in which being 
or the other or the very same I, are not "known" generates in turn 
desire and actions conditioned by desire. Actions performed under 
the influence of desire tend to confirm this illusory duality, how- 
ever, and increasingly tie the I to something apparently other than 
itself. As a result, the I becomes increasingly needy and restless, as 
it moves further along the temporal series and the process of be- 
coming, all the while experiencing recurring delusions and new 
needs. This reminds us of a man who is running in the futile 
attempt to catch his own shadow. 

The third kankuka is niyati, which corresponds to a limitation of 
autonomy. This limitation in turn is caused by the system of rela- 
tions deriving from raga. The fourth kankuka is kala (not to be 
confused with the first one, kala), through which the finite condition 
eventually affects power. Collected and full energy (sarvakaritrita) is 
now transformed into a determinate power, which is defined by a 



42 



The Doctrine of the Tattvas: The Human Condition 

specific existential condition and by a specific body. This takes 
place on an epistemological level. The omniscient being assumes 
the form of a "finite knower." Moreover, while at Ishvara's level 
knowledge is characterized by an objective transparency, at this 
level it is influenced by various emotive responses, by habitual 
tendencies (samskaras), by what is related to desire, by an elan vital, 
and by a given existential condition. The power that acts in this 
fashion is called vidya-kankuka. At this point, maya-shakti's function 
has been completely fulfilled. Every possible experience is condi- 
tioned by such things as peculiarity, multiplicity (in the spatial 
dimension), time, causality, impulses, and actions deriving from a 
state of existential deprivation. The difference is that at the level of 
the semipure tattvas, all of the above limitations have not yet de 
facto materialized; they are rather considered to be generic, poten- 
tial conditions for the various forms of finite existence that find 
their fulfillment only at the level of the impure tattvas. 

In the Tantras even impure tattvas are approximately the same 
as those expounded by Sankhya and by Vedanta. The first of these 
tattvas is buddhi, the principle of every individuation, which is free 
from every particular form of conditioned existence. At this level 
individual consciousness appears as a samsaric reflection of a higher 
consciousness. That is why Sankhya considered buddhi to be the 

"7 

intersection of purushic and prakritic elements. The function of 
this tattva consists in acting as an intermediate principle between 
the individual and the superindividual dimensions. Since buddhi 
is, in itself, on a higher plane than individuation, a continuity 
between forms and individual states can therefore be estab- 
lished. This continuity, however, cannot be seen from the per- 
spective of those who identify with these states and who are 
being swept away by the current. The fact that this continuity 
cannot be seen may even refer, at a certain level, to various mani- 
festations of the I assuming the form of unrelated lives. Let us not 
forget that the belief in a sequence of existences is the cardinal tenet 
of the popular theory of reincarnation. With regard to the indi- 
vidual consciousness, which is limited to only one life, buddhi is 
also called mahat, the "great principle." On the level of individual 
psychology, every decision, deliberation, and determination is de- 
termined by it. Buddhi even acts in those volitional and decisive 
aspects of the inner life. 

Ahamkara, or asmita-tattva, comes right after buddhi. We have 
already encountered this term before; as in several other instances, 
it receives different meanings according to the reference points and 



43 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

planes of existence being adopted. The word ahamkara specifically 
refers to that particular form of "I-ness" which, as in the case of 
individual consciousness, is characterized by the intake of data of 
a given experience, both internally and externally. On the one hand, 
through ahamkara an experience is considered to be "my own" and 
subjectivized. On the other hand, the I assumes certain determina- 
tions to be its own, thus coming to a conclusion that may be thus 

o 

expressed: "I am this being who is variously det ermined." This led 
Patanjali to consider ahamkara and avidya as synonymous, since 
atman in its essence cannot be localized, being a power over and 
beyond forms. As in the case of ahamkara, buddhi's determination 
is concretized and expressed in a given state of existence, which is 
still conditioned by the ties represented by the notions "ego" and 
mine. 

The process of individuation is furthermore developed mainly 
through the third semipure tattva, which is manas, and then (contin- 
ues to develop) through the five tanmatras. Manas, which has the 
same root as the Latin word mens, can somehow be equated with 
the mind, not as a psychological reality, but rather as an organ and 
a "power." Thus we may say that manas is the power at work in 
perceptions, in an individual's reactions, and in the production of 
images (fantasy, imagination). It differs in two aspects from the 
modern understanding of mind and thought. 

First, manas is other than atman. Mind and thought are not to 
be confused with the spiritual principle. Manas is conceived as an 
organ, or as an instrument. According to Sankhya, prakriti (nature), 
and not purusha, constitutes manas's substance. (This is a far cry 
from the modern Western glorification and exaltation of thought. 
Westerners would probably consider the yogic practice of neutral- 
izing or of "killing" the manas to be inconceivable, absurd, and 
even abhorrent). In turn, manas is the root and the fundamental 
principle of the senses, and it corresponds more or less to the 
medieval European philosophical notion of the sensorium commune. 
According to a view expressed in the Bhrihad-Aranyaka-Upanishad, 
it is through the manas that one is able to see, to hear, to taste, and 
so on. The senses are manas's articulations, as well as the atman's 
organs. Manas makes sensory knowledge possible, inasmuch as it 
is connected to the various powers of sensible reality. These powers 
are the so-called tanmatras, more on which later. As a result of 
maya-shakti's splitting function, they are perceived by the individual 
as representations or subjective impressions ("names") and as the 
external reality ("forms"). 9 The congruency and correspondence 



44 



The Doctrine of the Tattvas: The Human Condition 

between the two series, which is the fundamental problem giving 
rise to epistemology, is guaranteed by an essential and preordained 
unity existing in the manas, albeit at a superindividual and precon- 
scious level. 

Second, manas's function, as I said, is not simply psychologi- 
cal. Manas is a power associated with ahamkara and therefore with 
a certain degree of individuality. This power carves out elements 
from the totality of the experience by promoting an awareness of 
some of its areas and sections to the exclusion of others, which are 
hidden, in that particular being, in the subconscious or in the 
unconscious. Cosmic experience then becomes, to a large extent, the 
unconscious or subconscious dimension of the single living being. 10 

Practically speaking, manas's selective action occurs in the con- 
text of an experience characterized by the five paramanus and 
tanmatras. In order to understand these tattvas, we need to reject 
the widely accepted notions regarding the process of perceptual 
and sensory knowledge, according to which perceptions are occa- 
sioned by real material objects. The Hindu view diverges from 
philosophical realism by upholding that there are no such things as 
matter (in the Western sense of the word) and objective physical 
realities. A reference is made, instead, to superphysical principles, 
which come before and are superior to mere subjective sensory 
perceptions and to what is commonly regarded as physical reality. 
These principles are known as tanmatras, a word related to the idea 
of measure (matra), and which refers to a qualifying, determining 
power. This determination is applied to sensible qualities, hence 
reference is made to the tanmatras of sound, touch, form, color, 
taste, and smell. In the objective order of things, namely, in nature, 
the tanmatras are manifested in the five mahabhutas ("the great 
elements"), which are ether, air, fire, water, and earth: hence the 
transverse correspondence of ether to sound, of air to tangible 
matter, of fire to form and colored matter, and of earth to smell. The 
word matter, in this context, is only meant analogously, since matter 
in the modern sense of the word is unknown to the aforesaid 
theory, according to which the only real substratum is Shakti, what- 
ever form it may take. The intent is to emphasize that sensory 
impressions have a definite, real substratum corresponding to their 
nature, and do not have a mere psychological relevance. 

Since the mahabhutas belong to the causal plane, they should 
not be confused with natural elements or with states of physical 
matter. The tanmatras, to which they should be reduced, must rather 
be conceived as "simplifying elements," that is, as principles at 



45 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

work in those elements that correspond to both shakti's various 
manifestations and to supersensory forms of experience. The phy- 
sical elements are mere manifestations and appearances on a par- 
ticular plane of the tanmatras and of the five great elements. 
This plane corresponds ontologically to the fifth element, earth, 
which is conceived as a phase of extreme condensation, that is, as 
a phase of shakti's complete objectivication and externalization. 
Therefore, the element earth is the principle of everything that 
appears to the senses in physical and material forms during the 
waking stage of an individual conscience. Ether, air, fire, and 
water, which are experienced in the ordinary human contact with 
nature, are not really the elements carrying such names, but are 
rather their symbolic and analogical manifestations in the world. 
The supernatural "great elements" can be experienced. The possi- 
bility of a supernatural, extrasensorial perception and of related 
powers arises only when the manas, in the context of yogic practice, 
withdraws from the organs of the senses. 

For instance, coming to know water means to leave behind its 
sensory perception and to ascend to a level that is hierarchically 
superior to the one encountered in the world. As I shall point out, 
in the doctrine of subtle or occult corporeity this corresponds to the 
svadhishthana-chakra, which is one of the "centers" coming imme- 
diately after earth. 

In regard to the subsequent organization of a finite existence, 
one must consider the geminate series of the ten indriyas, composed 
of five cognitive senses (jnanen-indriyas) and of five conative senses 
(karmenin-indriyas). Indriyas means "pertaining to Indra." These are 
powers or faculties related to organs through which the manas, in 
association with ahamkara, carves out, as I have said, the form and 
destiny of a given individual existence. The five cognitive indriyas 
are related to the ears, skin (as the general organ of touch), eyes, 
tongue, and nose. These occur in a progressive order, from hearing 
(which corresponds to ether) to the sense of smell (which corre- 
sponds to earth). The conative indriyas are related to the organs 
responsible for excretion, reproduction, grasping (hands), locomo- 
tion, and expression (voice, words, etc.). They are divided into two 
groups of five: five mahabhutas and five tanmatras. According to the 
standard organic-qualitative Hindu worldview, this system is kept 
together by relationships of correspondence, which are particularly 
important in the elaboration of a science of subtle reactions, of 
evocations, and of awakenings. 

We may well remember that the unfolding always works from 



46 



The Doctrine of the Tattvas: The Human Condition 

the inside out, and that the outer, by virtue of leaning on the inner, 
is conditioned by it. Thus the objects of knowledge depend, meta- 
physically speaking, on the organs of knowledge. These in turn 
depend on the "inner organ" (buddhi + ahamkara + manas). The 
inner organ depends on the spiritual principle, according to the 
simile "Just as the rim of a chariot wheel is fixed on the spokes, and 
the spokes are fixed on the hub, even so, these elements of being 
are fixed on the elements of intelligence, and the elements of intel- 
ligence are fixed on the breathing spirit [prana]." 11 The prana in this 
text is identified with the "intelligential self (prajnatman). On the 
empirical plane of separated existences, this identification does not 
prevent the subject of knowledge from being the "elemental I" 
(bhuta-atman), that is, the I who is found in the diversified interplay 
of the gunas and who is, in different degrees of passivity, carried 
away by its own experiences. 12 

According to the Tantras, this is the whole series of the thirty- 
six tattvas. Once Shakti arrives at prithivi ("earth"), she stops and 
becomes fixed. Shakti now stands on the threshold of her own 
manifestation and, at the same time, identifies with the "other," 
losing herself in it. The action of manifestation, at this point, is 
worn out. Shakti becomes kundalini, "wrapped up." She is repre- 
sented asleep at the center of occult corporeity, which corresponds 
to earth (prithivi- chakr a). She is portrayed as a serpent wound into 
three coils around the symbolic phallus of Shiva, who is the mo- 
tionless lord presiding over the manifestation. The three coils sym- 
bolize the three gunas. The rest of the serpent represents the forms 
and the determinations (vikritis) which develop through maya and 
through the other tattvas. Shakti's infinite potential, which un- 
folded in the process of manifestation, becomes gathered and lost in 
itself, in that particular center (chakra) corresponding to the earth. 

According to the Tantric perspective, the gunas are responsible 
for the differentiation of various aspects of nature. In the inorganic 
world, power is essentially under the sign of tamas. Thus it enjoys 
a minimal degree of freedom, which eventually is lost in the course 
of an automatic and mechanical process. Matter in this case repre- 
sents the objectification of the furthest limit reached by ignorance 
and, therefore, by the power's passivity as such. In the organic 
world, tamas's action becomes feebler. In it, "life" already repre- 
sents a partially liberated Shaktic form, which becomes increasingly 
free as it ascends along the organic evolutionary ladder. Therefore, 
the various forms of existence in this world may be considered as 
the objectification and as the symbol of higher degrees of intelli- 



47 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

gence (vidya). In other words, life is seen as a fire that consumes 
ignorance. In a living organism, the "other" is gathered to a certain 
degree into some kind of unity and is perfused by a certain light. 
Shakti, essentially under the sign of rajas, characterizes outward 
movement, elan, and dynamism. Eventually, once life is gathered 
and connected with higher forms of consciousness (e.g., with 
humankind), then sattva's influence, whose essence is being and 
pure light, becomes manifested. 

Humans are Shakti under the double form of conscious, active 
power (corresponding to what is usually called "spirit") and of 
unconscious, passive power (corresponding to organic life and the 
body). The individual's unconscious corresponds to the macro- 
cosm. Through the tamasic form, a finite being experiences the 
macrocosm and the collective powers hidden in reality. The idea 
that cosmic forces are locked in the unconscious and in the vital 
organic elements became the cornerstone of Tantric hatha yoga. 
These forces constitute each person's occult corporeity. Generally 
speaking, Tantric and Hindu teachings use the term body (kaya) in 
a broader sense, in reference to those fundamental elements that are 
presupposed by every individual existence, even though they usu- 
ally go undetected. Such is the case with a hand, which even 
though it may be the only visible part of a body, still presupposes 
an organism as a whole. 

In reference to these "bodies" the Tantras follow Sankhya's 
lead by distinguishing a triple body, comprising the following parts: 

1. A "causal" body (karana-sharira), which follows the higher tattvas. 

2. A "subtle body" (sukshma-sharira), which in turn has two aspects. 
The first aspect is a creation of the mind (the so-called mind- 
body, manomaya, or vijnanamaya) in which buddhi, manas, and 
the five great elements have free play (these are also the imma- 
terial principles that are prior and superior to the various pow- 
ers of sensory perceptions, which they still condition). The sec- 
ond aspect is a "vital" one (the so-called body of life or of 
breath, pranamaya) that is the substratum of every organic and 
physiological reality, of various forces, and of vital functions. 
The mind-body takes up this vital body in the course of samsaric 
manifestations. 

3. A "material" or "dense" body (sthula-karira), which is the empiri- 
cal body, the soma. This body consists of the coming together of 
the specifications of the five elements (bhuta), and it represents 



48 



The Doctrine of the Tattvas: The Human Condition 

the grossest and most exterior form of the manifestation of a 
human entity. The material body is sustained by the subtle 
body, which in turn is sustained by the causal body. 

It is relevant at this point to add some other remarks concern- 
ing the second body (the subtle body) considered in its vital aspect, 
because of the important similarities it shares with yoga. This body 
is an entity that, in respect to the material body, plays the same 
function that Aristotle attributed to the "entelechy." This notion has 
lately been picked up by some modern biological theories with a 
vitalistic orientation. Entelechy is, so to speak, the "life's life," an 
immaterial and simple reality that unifies the body by penetrating 
and animating it. It is also at the origin of the body's special form 
or constitution, of particular relationships, and of the harmony of 
its various functions. The difference between the Aristotelian en- 
telechy and modern vitalism, on the one hand, and Hindu teach- 
ings, on the other hand, is that in the latter, entelechy is not re- 
duced to a mere explicative principle. 

Prana, the universal life force, which according to traditional 
teaching constitutes the subtle body, can also be experienced dur- 
ing the subtle state coinciding with the awakening of one's body. It 
is said that during this state prana appears luminous and radiant 
(tejas). It is written in an Upanishad: "Life is the breathing spirit 
[prana]. The breathing spirit, verily, is life." 14 

Even though it is not endowed with breath, as in some crude 
interpretations of these teachings, prana is connected with the vital 
"breath" whose five modes of existence are outlined in the hyper- 
physical Hindu physiology: prana, apana, vyana, samana, and udana. 
These are the five vayus, a word that can be translated as "cur- 
rents," since it derives from the root va, "to move," and designates 
the movement of the air masses and of the winds. The doctrine of 
vayus is abstruse for two reasons. First, they are the elements of a 
supernatural (yogic) experimental science. Second, the texts are not 
always in agreement as to which of the various definitions of the 
vayus is the correct one. According to the prevalent view, the first 
vayu, which carries the same name of prana (the universal life 
force), has a solar character, and it exercises a compelling and 
attractive influence on the cosmic milieu engulfing it. This prana 
assimilates everything that comes out of the cosmic prana. When it 
is compared to breathing, it represents the inhaling phase. 

Apana, which has a terrestrial character, is interpreted by the 
texts in various ways. It mainly corresponds to the vital energy at 



49 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

work in excretory and ejecting functions (particularly in the emis- 
sion of semen, in the domain of sexuality). Vyana, the "pervading 
breath," permeates the body, holds it together, and even presides 
over the metabolism and organic processes such as digestion and 
blood circulation. Udana has an opposite function to the first vayu, 
namely, of exhalation instead of inhalation. Udana's unfolding into 
the cosmic milieu is associated with the functions of speech and 
pronunciation. It refers to the exhaling of one's last breath at the 
time of death. It also refers to the ascending current in the sushumna- 
nadi ("most gracious channel") of those who leave behind the hu- 
man condition in order to experience the active yogic death. In 
hatha yoga, prana and apana are considered to be antithetical, since 
the former is oriented upward and the latter downward. Vyana 
attempts to keep these opposites in equilibrium. 

Because of its dynamic and lively character, the pranic body 
enjoys a special relationship with Shakti, since she is, contrary to 
Shiva, the active principle behind movement and life. The Western 
Hermetic-alchemical symbolism alludes to this reality when it talks 
about the "philosophers' woman" or the "occult woman." 

The subtle body is usually thought to be the seat of samskara, 
or vasana. The tattvas doctrine, which accounts for the general 
condition of individual consciences living in certain forms of exist- 
ence, still does not explain the empirical existence of a given indi- 
vidual conscience, or jiva. We have seen how manas-tattva carves 
out, circumscribes, and organizes a specific experience. Why is this 
experience being determined instead of another? Why does a cer- 
tain world, rather than another, come to be known by a jiva? This 
world must correspond to what the living individual being affirms 
or desires in its deep, transcendental will to become (which has 
been shown to be related to the buddhi-tattva); hence the broader 
meaning of samskara. The various samskaras correspond to an in- 
ner, transcendental prefiguration toward which the discriminating 
and individuating activity of manas is oriented. In a narrower 
context, they are subconscious potentialities encountered in the 
course of life. Some of them have an organic character, others have 
a psychological character. As one can see, they involve the form 
and physical makeup of a given body, as well as the temperament, 
character, and habitual tendencies of a given individual. 

We are what we are, even though each of us lives in his or her 
own world, because a specific group of samskaras is present in each 
of us rather than a different one. We may encounter this notion 
even in Western philosophy (Kant, Schopenhauer), where it is spo- 



50 



The Doctrine of the Tattvas: The Human Condition 

ken of as "intelligible or mnemonic character." The Hindu idea has 
wider implications, however, since it extends to the biological and 
subtle domains, as well as to anything that determines the existen- 
tial situation of a given individual. 

What then is then the origin of the samskara(s)? This is a 
complex question, and it can be answered only by referring to the 
doctrine of "multiple legacies." Among many popular beliefs of 
Hinduism, we find an explanation based on the idea of reincarna- 
tion, which should be accepted with due caution. It is claimed that 
samskaras, which are the elements constituting a finite being en- 
dowed with body, mind, habitual tendencies, and experience, are 
the effects and the consequence of previous existences, which are in 
turn determined by karma. 

This does not really solve the problem but merely recasts it in 
different terms. If in order to explain the samskaras that are at work 
in the present existence we have to go back to activities exercised 
in a previous life, the problem merely compounds. In order to 
explain why those activities took place, we would have to go back, 
even further, to a previous life, and then to the one before that, and 
so on, ad infinitum. It is my contention that eventually the series 
must stop and be explained in terms of an original act of self- 
determination. What is this act all about? That is an open question. 
The answer cannot be located in time and in space, since, in these 
categories, there is no continuity between the various manifesta- 
tions of a single conscience, or between the multiple existences, as 
the reincarnation myth upholds. Continuity is to be found only in 
the subtle, vital (pranic) plane, and in the power of life, which is 
neither dependent on a single body nor exhausted in it. In a higher 
degree, it exists in the level of buddhi-tattva, the "individuating 
individual," whose nature consists in shaping reality. One must 
think that at the highest level of the impure tattvas, an inference 
takes place in the following terms: pure self-determination, which 
is a "slice" of higher planes, proceeds from the sphere of pure 
tattvas and from the causal body, which then translates itself into 
the act of buddhi. 

There is no explanation for this determination, since it takes 
place in a domain where the supreme reason for acting resides with 
act itself, where causes are not determined by other causes, and 
where forms are manifested as stages of what has been called 
Shakti's "play," Vila. In these higher planes of existence (prajina) 
there are no antecedent causes and not even samskaras. Samskaras 
are eventually picked up at a later stage, as a result of the election, 



51 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

coalescence, and appropriation following the merging with the 
samsaric current. This current includes predetermined forms and 
various legacies (whether biological or pranic), which refer to pre- 
vious elements, whether connected or not. In this sense, samskaras 
actually exist in the subtle body in which the causal body is mani- 
fested. They are also responsible for imparting direction both to 
manas's selective action, through its organs, and to the life that 
supports, nourishes, and shapes the physical form. Somehow the 
ancient notions of "demon" and "genie" may be reduced to the 
body of life informed by a special group of samskaras, which, 
through buddhi, brings to life the samsaric image of the unmovable 
Shiva. Therefore, samskaras should not be confused with the real, 
deeper nucleus of one's personality, which from the level of buddhi 
on is found outside the conditions for which previous existences 
took place. This contributes to demythologizing the popular belief 
in reincarnation, which is not part of esoteric teachings, regardless 
of what some may think. 16 

So far I have expounded the Tantras' worldview and anthro- 
pology. Even though metaphysical speculation plays an important 
role in these texts, they should not be viewed as philosophical 
textbooks. The theory found in the Tantras has been developed in 
view of practical applications, and it plays a major role in sadhana- 
shastra. The theory constitutes the background and the foundation 
of a system in which action plays a key role. Thus it is said: "All the 
knowledge acquired by a brilliant mind is useless if one does not 

i n 

obtain the power conferred by sadhana." In the next chapters I 
will expound the rituals and the techniques of Tantric yoga. 



52 



PASHU, VIRA, AND DIVYA 

THE PATH OF THE 

LEFT HAND 



In the first chapter we learned that Tantrism is a multiform phe- 
nomenon. It is crucial to make an initial distinction between the 
popular versions of Tantrism, which should be considered the sur- 
vival or, better, the revival of cults and of religious practices found 
in the pre-Aryan substratum, and the higher forms typical of initia- 
tory and yogic practices. The latter forms, aside from the specific 
direction imparted to them by Shaktism and Shaivism, are charac- 
terized by the pursuit of the highest ideal of Hindu spirituality, 
which is the "great liberation," or the attempt to free a human 
being from all kinds of conditioning. 

We are not going to pursue the popular versions of Tantrism, 
since they are the subject matter of ethnology. In them we encoun- 
ter the cult of Devi, which sometimes is associated with witchcraft 
and orgies. Later on I will refer to such versions only to point out 
how they have been incorporated into various types of Tantric 
sadhana. 

It is possible to relate the main expressions of this sadhana to 
a typology and to the problem of individual qualifications (adhikaras). 
It is a well-accepted opinion that different spiritual paths corre- 
spond to different situations. A path that is fit for a particular 
individual's situation may not be so for another's, and therefore it 

53 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

ought to be discouraged or even interdicted to him. Sir John 
Woodroffe, talking about experiences that some may consider dis- 
turbing, suggested that we should say instead, "This is not good for 
me." 1 ' 

The abovementioned typology is based on the theory of the 
three gunas. There are people informed by tamas, by rajas, or by 
sattva, in whom the respective qualities of each category are pre- 
dominant. The Tantras make a general distinction between beings 
belonging to the first type (tamas) and those belonging to the other 
two types (rajas and sattva), and insist that only the latter two types 
are fit to engage in sadhana and yoga. A characteristic Tantric 
notion is that of pashu, which is applied to the first category. Pashu 
means "animal" and may designate an animalistic and impulsive 
individual, who is driven by lower instincts. The word pashu comes 
from the verb pac, "to bind." It designates not only those beings 
who are subject to primitive urges and in whom the material and 
animal nature predominates, but also those beings who are pas- 
sively bound by social and moral concerns, and who conform, 
without possessing "knowledge," to various norms and rituals. 
Tamas's obtuse and limited nature is amply revealed in such indi- 
viduals. This, however, does not imply that pashu is necessarily an 
"evil" thing; according to the common opinion, it is considered a 
good thing. The Tantras say that during the Kali Yuga, the last age, 
there exist, mainly though not only, pashu-nature beings. We must 
acknowledge that such an idea, which was formulated many centu- 
ries ago, describes rather accurately the times we live in. A recur- 
rent theme in the Hindu Tantras is the attribution to pashu of all 
religious and devotional practices. They even consider the 
Vedachara, the collective Vedic-brahmanic rituals, as something 
related to pashu, or at best, to the lower grades of the next group, 
that of the viras. 

Vira is a term with the same Latin root vir, which does not 
describe an ordinary man (homo), but rather an eminent man. The 
term denotes a manly and "heroic" nature (vira is sometimes used 
as a substitute for "hero"), which is essentially determined by the 
rajas guna. Viras in turn have often been divided into many catego- 
ries. According to the Kularnava-Tantra, there are right-hand viras 
(Dakshinachara) and left-hand viras (Vamachara). The latter are 
considered superior to the former, and the text describes them as 
warriors (kshatriyas), to emphasize the virtues of strength, boldness, 
and indifference toward danger. Next come the Siddhas and the 
kaulas, whose path - Kaulachara - knows no equal. Developing a 



54 



Pashu, Vira, and Divya: The Path of the Left Hand 

Buddhist simile, a text says that "as the footmarks of all animals 
disappear in the footmark of the elephant, so do all other dharmas 
disappear in the kula-dharma." 3 The word Siddha denotes perfection 
and fulfillment; thus it may be considered the equivalent of "adept." 
The word kaula, instead, derives from kula. This term, with the 
ordinary meaning of "great family" or "noble clan," came to desig- 
nate an organization or an initiatory chain, in which Shakti's real 
presence is supposed to take place. In this context the Devi is called 
"the Lady of the Kula." Kaulas are those who belong to any such 
organizations. If viras are characterized mainly by the rajas guna, 
this quality, by ascending the hierarchical levels we just mentioned, 
becomes pure and turns into the sattva guna, which characterizes 
the divya (from devas, "gods"), the third element in the tripartite 
classification of pashu, vira, and divya. 4 

Ascending from lower levels to higher, viras are subject to 
increasingly fewer limitations and ties. Rites, practices, and tradi- 
tional cults may be retained, but only according to the distinction 
between those who have knowledge (prabuddha), or those who are 
aware of their nature and of their superior esoteric, initiatory val- 
ues, and the common folks (mudha). The secret ritual, the so-called 
panchatattva, is the prerogative of the viras. This ritual, which I will 
discuss in Chapter IX, includes the use of sex and of intoxicating 
beverages. Nothing is forbidden to the kaula and to those who have 
achieved the condition of a true siddha-vira, since they are and they 
know. They are lords of their passions, and they fully identify with 
Shakti. As the supreme Shakti, or Parashakti, is over and beyond 
any pair of opposites, likewise the kaula is beyond good and evil, 
honor and dishonor, merit and sin, and any other value cherished 
by ordinary people, the so-called pashus. Like Shakti, who is abso- 
lutely free, the kaula is called svecchakari, which means "one who 
can do as he or she pleases." Because of his behavior, ordinary 
people may fear, shun, or condemn a kaula. 5 

There is a significant difference between the two Tantric paths, 
that of the right hand and that of the left hand (which are both 
under Shiva's aegis). In the former, the adept always experiences 
"someone above him," even at the highest level of realization. In 
the latter, "he becomes the ultimate Sovereign" (cakravartin = world 
ruler). 6 This means that the duality between the integrated person 
and the dimension of transcendence, or between the human and 
God, has been overcome. All differentiations and subordinate rela- 
tionships are rendered obsolete once the Shiva condition is achieved. 
Quite often, in the Buddhist Tantras, Buddha proclaims the viras' 



55 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

and kaulas' law (dharma) to be "beyond the Vedas" and free from 
the conditionings to which the pashus are subject. The kaulas are 
said to be extremely powerful both in granting favors and in strik- 
ing down their enemies, as well as to be capable of enjoying every 
sensible object without becoming addicted to it. They act under the 
different disguises of men who comply with moral and social laws 
(shishta), of men who break those laws (brashta), and even of super- 
natural and incorporeal beings. Again, in the Buddhist Tantras, 
Buddha paradoxically upholds the relativity of every moral pre- 
cept, the uselessness of worship, the insignificance of the five pre- 
cepts of early Buddhism, and even of the triple homage (triratna) of 
Buddhist tradition (to the Buddha, to the law [dharma] and to the 
monastic community [sangha]), in terms so blunt that at monastic 
gatherings the bodhisattvas, those who are on their way toward 
enlightenment, faint, while the tathagatas, the enlightened ones, 
remain unmoved. Hindu Tantras share a similar perspective: the 
siddha remains pure and unblemished even while performing ac- 
tions the mere mention of which would automatically damn any- 
body else. 

Some explanations are in order. First, it is necessary to draw a 
distinction between an ideal (and those who have truly fulfilled it) 
and what applies to a specific discipline. Generally speaking, India 
has overlooked moralism, which conversely has become predomi- 
nant in the West. In India moral precepts have never been given an 
absolute, categorical value. Vis-a-vis the spiritual dimension, they 
are considered simply means to higher goals. Hence the well-known 
Buddhist simile in which the moral law (sila) is compared to a raft 
that is built in order to cross a river and that is left behind once one 
arrives at the other bank. Second, and not without relation to what 
has been said, we find constant mention of the invulnerability of 
those endowed with transcendent knowledge. 

The Manava-Dharmashastra, the oldest Indo-Aryan code, al- 
most flaunts what a Brahman endowed with spiritual knowledge 
may do without being defiled as a consequence of his actions. 7 Such 
a knowledge is compared to a fire that in the process of burning 
consumes every fault (or at least what other people consider a 
fault). In the Upanishads this theme is reiterated a few times. The 
lot of those who know brahman is not influenced by good or by evil 
deeds, since these deeds are other than they and have no power 
over them. In other words, they are over and beyond karma, 
which is the law of cause and effect. We may add that transcen- 
dence of common laws is even encountered in popular versions of 



56 



Pashu, Vira, and Divya: The Path of the Left Hand 

Shaivism, in which Shiva is considered the god or patron saint of 
those who do not lead a normal existence, and even of outlaws. 

The Tantras merely take the coherent doctrine of nonduality 
(advaita-vada) to its logical conclusion. They claim that Vedanta and 
other speculative schools abound with metaphysical disquisitions 
concerning nonduality. But how can they be reconciled with the 
interdictions and restrictions found in them? If brahman of sacred 
tradition (shruti) is truly "one without a second," then what is the 
sense of distinguishing between good and evil, pure and impure, 
and between what ought to be done and what should be avoided? 
This contrast in values exists only for those who are dominated by 
maya-shakti, rather than dominate it. Since there is no other (the 
other in brahman being only the power of manifestation to which it 
is inseparably joined) on a metaphysical rather than on an ethical 
plane, there is not one thing that is not pure, good, and right. The 
doctrine of cosmic play (Ma), or of Parashakti's freedom, which has 
nothing above her, and who is not subject to any law, helps to 
emphasize the point I am trying to make. 

The Tantras, while upholding these metaphysical truths, re- 
main true to their pragmatic orientation when dealing with indi- 
vidual practical situations. For all practical purposes, it cannot be 
ignored that the starting point is given by a conditioned being and 
that even those who have a vira's qualifications and calling must 
recognize that liberation from encumbrances and differentiation 
from pashus represent a goal, a task to be accomplished, rather 
than the starting point. The doctrine of cosmic play and of Shakti's 
freedom constitutes the background to all of this. A particular liv- 
ing being, a jiva, is definitely not Parashakti, however, and as long 
as it remains a finite being, it does not have the freedom to do as 
it pleases. It may even indulge in antinomianism and have no 
respect for laws. In this case a jiva will have to endure the conse- 
quences of its actions on the existential plane in which it lives and 
by which it is conditioned. Generally speaking, this conditioning 
may be related to the Hindu notion of dharma. Dharma in this 
context refers to the nature of a given being. It characterizes it on 
a samsaric plane and makes it different from other beings. Dharma, 
which constitutes a being's inner law, is eventually translated into 
a social norm (a caste's dharma corresponds to the norms regulat- 
ing its members' conduct). This law may or may not be recognized 
and followed. From this choice retributive effects arise, according 
to the law of karma. Karma causes all beings to reap the conse- 
quences of their actions, whether they are direct and immediate or 



57 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

indirect and deferred. This is not an extrinsic law, based on moral 
judgment, but rather an immanent and impersonal law, since an 
action produces a given result almost mechanically. Therefore, the 
correlation of dharma and karma defines the conditioned existence 
of all beings who live in the manifested order of reality. 

We should speak of determinism only in a relative sense, since 
the possibility of acting contrary to or violating dharma (adharma) 
is as real as the consequences that will ensue. It is like a person who 
ingests a damaging food regardless of the consequences. From an 
ontological rather than moral point of view, the consequence of 
adharma for any conditioned being usually consists in descending 
along the hierarchy of beings. In such a being, adharma represents 
the predominance of the chaotic, formless, and purely Shaktic ele- 
ment over the stable, formal element. The popular equivalent of 
this notion is "going to hell." 

The highest Hindu ideal of liberation, moksha, is synonymous 
with the radical deconditioning of one's being, and thus it implies 
going beyond dharma and karma. On a social plane, Hinduism did 
acknowledge one's right to leave dharma and to be excused from 
obligations to one's caste in order to pursue the Absolute through 
asceticism and contemplative yoga. I find it necessary to emphasize 
the absolute nature of the ultimate goal, which somehow eludes 
most Westerners. The goal consists in transcending and in subordi- 
nating to oneself every form of existence, whether divine, human, 
subhuman, material, or spiritual. It has been suggested that a di- 
vine nature is subject to conditionings like every other nature, in 
the same fashion that a human is bound, be it by a gold or iron 
chain. 9 We are dealing here with a worldview according to which 
the world, which is opposed to the formless Absolute, may turn out 
to be the right key to paradise (sukhavati) just as a holy person 
whose life conforms to dharma may inherit this state of bliss as a 
consequence of karma. Going from one plane in the heavenly hier- 
archy to another is not important, since they all are forms of con- 
ditioned existence. There is a saying: "Matter and place may vary, 
but the modality [of a conditioned being] remains the same in both 
the lord of all gods and in the vilest animal." 10 When dealing with 
tattvas, we saw how the lord himself, Ishvara or Brahma (i.e., the 
God of theism), is believed to be a part of the manifestation, even 
though he represents its peak and boundary. According to a drastic 
Buddhist saying, which incidentally attributes to Brahma a subor- 
dinated position with regard to Buddha, 11 the gods may not expe- 
rience liberation because they are "dulled" by heavenly pleasures. 



58 



Pashu, Vira, and Divya: The Path of the Left Hand 

According to another point of view, professed by both Patanjali, the 
great yoga teacher, and by the Tantras, the gods should be consid- 
ered enemies of the yogin, because as powers presiding over the 
natural order of things, they attempt to block the path of those who 
want to become free from it and dominate it. 

After this clarification, let us proceed to determine how libera- 
tion is experienced by the Tantric Siddha and kaula. In this context, 
antinomy, the destruction of bonds and adharma (an action against 
dharma) are considered means to an end and a discipline to be 
followed. Generally speaking, such a behavior is destructive, be- 
cause if it is carried out by an ordinary person (pashu) it would 
destroy him and cause him to descend along the hierarchy of 
beings. On the contrary, the adept (vira) imparts to this process an 
orientation leading him upward, acting in a positive way and free- 
ing him from various bonds. We may then say that the elementary 
Shaktic nature underlying dharma is activated over and against 
dharma. Thus adharma turns into a ritualistic and transcendental 
catharsis. It is like unveiling an original reality; or like evoking a 
Shaktic world in which good and evil, human and divine, high and 
low no longer have any meaning; or like transcending forms; or like 
breaking free from the chains; or like experiencing an abyssal depth, 
which is capable of devouring Ishvara himself. The goal is to expe- 
rience all of these things without being overwhelmed, to be trans- 
formed and to gain access to the Absolute. One of the fundamental 
principles of Left-Hand Tantrism consists in never becoming sepa- 
rated from the powers of pravritti-marga, namely, the descending, 
Shaktic phase of the manifestation. A kaula should rather assume 
those powers and bring them to the highest degree of intensity 
whereby they consume themselves. This is the Tantric teaching of 
Indrabhuti's Jnanasiddhi, which should nevertheless be kept secret 
and communicated only to initiates, least immeasurable evils should 
follow: "The yogin obtains liberation through the same actions that 
should keep in hell any other man for ages unending." 

The risk involved is evident. In the Tantras an aspirant is 
compared to a snake that is made to go up a hollow bamboo. It 
must ascend and escape at the top, at the peril otherwise of falling 
down. The texts mention the danger of deviations and the possibil- 
ity that what is meant as an instrument to reach the goal may 
malfunction. On the one hand, the Tantras contend that one who 
has obtained the privilege of being born as a human being and yet 
does not learn to transcend the human condition is like one who 
commits suicide. On the other hand, they claim that walking on the 



59 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

viras' and kaulas' path is as difficult as walking on a razor's edge 
or as riding a wild tiger. 14 The Tantras continuously repeat that the 
hero's path is filled with dangers and that the pashu, a person with 
an animal nature - that is, a being who is weak and fettered, unable 
to rise above his fears - must avoid it at all costs. Thus the ritual of 
panchatattva is kept secret in order to avoid both the dangers in- 
herent in it as well as the misunderstandings and criticisms of 
outsiders, who are unable to comprehend its deeper meaning. It is 
therefore necessary to examine oneself, one's nature, capabilities, 
and vocation, since it is also claimed: "Hard is the great path and 
few are they who travel it to the end, but greatly guilty is he who, 
after entering the way of yoga, gives up his journey and turns 
back." 15 This person is said to be digging his own grave. 

It is now evident that adequate preparation and orientation are 
required. I shall deal with the issue of preparation in Chapter VII, 
when discussing purification of the will, the symbolism of the 
Virgin, and the escape from everyday life's nooses (pasha). The 
main goal of this preparation is to awaken in oneself the Shiva 
principle and to become firmly rooted in it before evoking the 
power of elementary shakti. As far as the orientation is concerned, 
it would be a serious mistake to think that the viras' path is equiva- 
lent to that of Nietzsche's superman, or of the hero's path fancied 
by various individualistic and anarchical theories (e.g., Stirner's). 
Tantrism does not intend to empower human nature to the highest 
degree, but rather wishes to cauterize it, thereby consuming the 
individualistic I and its hubris in the attempt to overcome the 
human condition. 

Before the spread of Tantrism, the Hindu tradition had debated 
which actions do not bind and which ones do not create karma. A 
distinction was established between sakama-karma and nishkama- 
karma. The former is an action performed out of desire and passion, 
since the samsaric I is attracted to various objects. The latter is a 
pure act, and an action performed for its own sake, with sacrificial 
and ritualistic overtones. Religiously speaking, it is an offering to 
the Absolute; metaphysically speaking, it is an attempt to reach the 
unconditioned. 1 In the Bhagavad-Gita the second type of action 
was facilitated by the lifting of various prohibitions typical of an 
ascetic ethics and morality, one of which, for instance, was ahimsa, 
the precept of nonviolence. In the Gita the god Krishna incites 
Arjuna to fight on and to kill even those friends and relatives 
militating on the enemy's side, declaring that his actions would not 
generate karma and be considered sinful as long as they were 



60 



Pashu, Vira, and Divya: The Path of the Left Hand 

performed in a pure, detached, impersonal way, that is, beyond the 
ideas of victory and defeat, joy and suffering, good and bad luck, 
I and Thou. In this text dharma appears to be limiting the warrior's 
(kshatriya's) way of life and ethical norms. In the end this limitation 
is not absolute, especially after Krishna, who is the metaphysical 
foundation and the ultimate goal of the Gita's teachings, reveals to 
Arjuna the dimension of transcendence and the nature of the Abso- 
lute. This Absolute is a power that on the plane of finite beings acts 
in a destructive fashion, almost as Dionysus Zagreus brings havoc 
to all things. Therefore, the teaching transmitted to Arjuna culmi- 
nates with a vision that is characteristic of this dimension of the 
godhead and that corresponds to the destructive and horrifying 

_ 1 Q 

attributes of Shiva and of the Tantric Kali. The problem is thus 
resolved by specifying what kind of action does not generate karma 
and conditionings, thus bestowing freedom and becoming the path 
toward total liberation. 

The presupposition of these worrisome aspects of the Path of 
the Left Hand consists in a similar orientation toward transcen- 
dence, and in purity of action. We may say that purity also consists 
in an ascetic action permitting experiences, such as orgies and 
cruelty, that were forbidden in the strictest forms of penitential and 
mortifying asceticism. According to a fundamental Tantric prin- 
ciple, while in other philosophical systems yoga (in the general 
sense of sadhana, the practice leading to overcoming the human 
condition) and bhoga (sheer enjoyment; to be open to every mun- 
dane experience) are mutually exclusive, in the kaulas's path they 
coexist. Such a principle applies to the path as well to the siddha's 
conduct. A Siddha is one who has arrived at the end of the journey; 
thus he can do anything he wants and go through all kinds of 
experiences as long as he remains detached and free from his ego's 
desires. In this situation karma does not take hold of him, since he 
is beyond both dharma and karma. The difference from an indi- 
vidualistic superman, not to mention from people like the Marquis 
de Sade, is rather obvious. 

According to another Tantric principle, spiritual realization 
may occur precisely through the obstacle that caused one to stumble. 
Stumble is an improper term, since it has nothing to do with the 
religious notion of "fall" or "sin." In the words of Aryadeva: "The 
world, being subject to passions, may achieve liberation only through 
them. As copper is transformed into gold through alchemical prac- 
tices, likewise, those who have gained knowledge use passions as 
the key to liberation." 19 What is being considered here is an inner 



61 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

change (ragacharya) by virtue of which a pure power (shakti) is 
extracted from what the pashu experiences as passion. This power 
in turn nourishes the inner flame and leads one to enlightenment 
(more on which later). In this context intensity acquires a new 
meaning. Several Tantric Buddhist texts underscore the relativity of 
all moral precepts, but also declare that passions lose their impure 
character once they become absolute and once they turn into el- 
ementary forces such as fire, water, earth, wind, and so forth. This 
transformation occurs when they depersonalize the individual (a 
Hermetic-alchemical expression is "to wash by burning"), thus pro- 
moting experiences found outside the conditioned consciousness. 
The difference between the two methods is very apparent. 
Yoga, especially the one influenced by Sankhya, intends to cauter- 
ize, so to speak, the source of samsaric "infection." The goal of this 
yoga is to remove the source of passions and concupiscence, through 
specific disciplines and techniques, right from the subconscious and 
preindividual roots, after duly isolating them. Generally speaking, 
the strategy employed requires nonaction, since any action brought 
about by karma generates new karma, that is, a further condition- 
ing. The ultimate goal of the Tantric viras is not so different. The 
method they employ requires not the isolation but rather the evo- 
cation and the radical absorption of the shaktic element present in 
their being. This is done in order to originate a self-consuming 
process culminating in an ecstatic catharsis. 

Both yoga and Tantrism follow a sadhana that excludes any- 
thing resembling a repression. In our day and age repression is a 
rich subject for the so-called depth psychology and for psycho- 
analysis. In yoga, consciousness is expanded until it sheds light on 
the darkest recesses of the human psyche. The doctrine of samskara 
and of vasana teaches that the psychological, mental, and emotional 
states of the ordinary conscious life of the individual (chittavritti) 
are not to be confused with their roots, which, as we have seen, 
may even have a preindividual and prenatal character, and whose 
substratum they represent. According to traditional yoga, it is not 
enough to modify chittavritti simply by excluding or by favoring 
certain inclinations, and by repressing or sublimating certain per- 
sonal traits or characteristics, as some contemporary moral systems 
suggest. In fact, according to the doctrine of samskara, once the 
forms in which a samskara takes root in ordinary wakeful state are 
removed or eliminated, it does not necessarily follow that the sub- 
conscious root itself has been removed. Usually a samskara will 
remain underground and flourish again, with the aid of favorable 



62 



Pashu, Vira, and Divya: The Path of the Left Hand 

circumstances, almost like a fire that only needs new material in 
order to gain new strength. According to yoga, in order to over- 
come certain dispositions and spiritual moods, one must reach and 
inexorably burn down those roots, as if they were sources of infec- 
tion. If behavioral modifications are to take place, and if these 
dispositions are to be transformed, one must introduce changes 
capable of producing a lasting impression on the samskaras, which 
are the deepest strata of the human psyche. 

A different attitude permeates the viras practices and rituals. It 
is necessary at this point to provide some further explanations 
concerning the Tantric way of dealing with passions. The idea of 
the purification of passions acquires in this context a special mean- 
ing, namely, that of a passage from the subjective-mental plane to 
a plane in which powers are reduced to bare essentials (to purify = 
to strip down). Those who follow this path and the disciplines 
associated with it eventually come to realize, through a direct expe- 
rience, that passions, emotions, and impulses are only mitigated, 
variously conditioned manifestations and faint echoes of powers. 
What has been said about the theory of the mahabhuta concerning 
the world of nature may be applied in this situation too. The "great 
elements" exist in and of themselves, beyond their visible manifes- 
tations. For instance, the fire of any given flame is only a particular 
and a contingent apparition caused by certain constant conditions 
that are mistaken for its cause, namely, fire itself. Thus, once 
concupiscence, hatred, anger, and sadness are manifested in vari- 
ous individuals because of different circumstances, they can all be 
identified with corresponding shaktis or beings (devatas), in other 
words, with metasubjective forces. Therefore, one should not say, 
"I love," "I hate," and so forth, but rather, "A given force is now 
manifested in me as love, or as hate," etc. The proof of this theory 
relies both on the compulsiveness of passions and of emotions and 
on the little power that people can exercise over them, regardless of 
what people may think. 

It is claimed that an immediate experience of this truth may 
cause a psychological breakdown. Such a breakdown may occur 
when a person becomes aware of being dominated by supernatural 
forces acting under the disguise of manifestations taking place in 
one own's soul (since the soul is merely the instrument of such 
manifestations). What ensues is a collapse of an illusory world, of 
the notions of "I" and "mine." A breakdown may also occur when 
emotions are no longer experienced as subjective reflections but 
rather as sheer forces. In such an instance they acquire an intensity 



63 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

and simplicity that may result in a serious imbalance in one's 
personal life. Figuratively speaking, it is as if a diaphragm perform- 
ing a protective function was suddenly removed. 

The Tantric method seeks out such experiences in order to 
achieve a higher freedom. The secret of its success consists in 
transforming passivity into activity. Whenever a passion or an 
impulse manifests itself as a rising surge, one should neither react 
nor passively endure it, but should rather open up and actively 
identify with it, taking care to reserve some strength, so as not to 
be carried away, but to remain in control of the situation. This state 
is progressively intensified, bringing the roots to the surface. What 
is taking place is the union of Shiva, represented by the active 
Siddha, with a Shakti. One should be careful to prevent Shakti from 
becoming predominant, lest unpleasant forms of obsession should 
take place, relegating the individual to a "demonic" condition and 
to a passive instrument of the force that one evoked with the 
illusion of dominating it. We shall see later on that at a certain level 
of the secret ritual, the techniques applied to some of its elements 
are not very different. 

If one makes it through this crucial point, and if similar expe- 
riences develop in a positive way, the result will be the elimination 
of one's needs and the demise of the tyranny of various passions 
and emotions. One then becomes "Lord of Passions," an expression 
designating much more than just the capability of keeping passions 
under control, or of totally suppressing them. As "Lord of Pas- 
sions" one is able to freely dispose of them. According to yogic 
doctrine, he who "knows" the element (bija) of fire does not need 
ordinary means to start one. Conversely, if all the conditions nec- 
essary to cause combustion are present, he can prevent the fire from 
flaring up. Likewise, he who follows the Tantric path can acquire 
the power of evoking or suspending at will any passions or emo- 
tions, independently from those objects and situations that usually 
cause them to arise. This may occur with an ease unknown to 
ordinary people, who are inclined to believe that feelings and pas- 
sions cannot be controlled and that the only true and authentic 
feelings are those that are passively experienced rather than those 
that are consciously induced. In the siddha's case, the passions' 
shaktis become part of his own being, and part of his own powers. 
In him, the Tantric principle of the unity of bhoga (enjoyment) and 
yoga (discipline) is actualized. Thus it is clear that the Siddha or 
kaula can do as he pleases, all the while remaining spiritually 
invulnerable. 



64 



Pashu, Vira, and Divya: The Path of the Left Hand 

Let us now turn to some practical instructions given to those 
who follow an analogous discipline. The starting point is a con- 
stant, attentive calm. A simile is employed, according to which 
water, when not stirred, becomes transparent, thus allowing one to 
see what is or what appears to be at the bottom. A text goes on to 
say: 

Whatever thoughts, or concepts, or obscuring [or disturbing] 
passions arise are neither to be abandoned nor allowed to con- 
trol one; they are to be allowed to arise without one's trying to 
direct [or shape] them. If one does no more than merely recog- 
nize them as soon as they arise and persists in doing so, they will 
come to be realized [or to dawn] in their true [or void] form 
through not being abandoned. By that method, all things which 
may seem to be obstacles to spiritual growth can be made use of 
as aids on the Path. And, therefore, the method is called "The 

90 

utilizing of obstacles as aids on the Path." 

This is a schematic outline of what should be done in order to 
experience passions as forces and as shaktis, and not just their 
psychological and affective dimensions. Their absorption and incor- 
poration into one's being will eventually occur at a later stage. 

Until now we have mainly examined the paths available to the 
vira, a being whose nature is informed by the rajas guna. It is 
important to recall that such a being may engage not only in 
experiences related to the secret ritual and in the above mentioned 
techniques, which lead to a liberation from all conditionings, but 
also and especially in magical and evocatory rituals. These rituals 
grant an immediate perception of supernatural forces, beyond the 
world of exterior forms and natural phenomena. The forces appear 
under the species of shaktis, since they are forms and manifesta- 
tions of the supreme Shakti (Parashakti). Thus a magical and highly 
symbolic view of the world constitutes the foundation of the entire 
ritualistic system of intermediate Tantric degrees, as well as of 
other systems. It is also the foundation of most techniques found in 
yoga, in the strict and spiritual sense of the word. Such, in fact, is 
the foundation of the theory and practice of mandalas and yantras, 
which are graphic symbols widely employed by every Tantric school. 
Mandalas are not conceived as artificial signs, helpful at best to 
evoke suggestive feelings, but rather as signaturae rerutn: expres- 
sions of the supernatural and objective structures of reality. A 
magical and symbolic worldview also constitutes the foundation of 



65 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

the doctrine of mantras and bijas, the supernatural form-giving 
forces that are the "soul" and the thaumaturgical principles of the 
"name of power" and of the "word in action." Again, it is the 
foundation of asanas and mudras, which are postures and gestures 
with magical and initiatory overtones. It is through this worldview 
that a part of the spirit of the early Vedic age, despite all, remains 
alive in the Tantras. In that age humans did not live as ascetics, 
struggling with the world and with samsara, but rather as free, 
uninhibited forces, in the company of various gods and spiritual 
powers, experiencing forms of enlightenment and supernatural 
energies, rapt in a state of cosmic and triumphant bliss. 

As we have seen, besides those beings who live under the aegis 
of tamas (the pashus) and of rajas (the viras and the kaulas), there 
are beings in whom sattva is predominant; these are the divyas, 
purely spiritual beings (literally, "divine beings"). The Tantras do 
not mention them often, maybe because in the last age, the Kali 
Yuga, they are difficult to find. In order to define this third category 
in the context of Tantrism, we may say that the divya follows 
mainly an inner path. He does not care about rituals promoting a 
violent self-transcendence, and not even about magical ritualism. 
He becomes detached from the dimension of action, like the follow- 
ers of Sankhya and of early Buddhism. The realm to which he 
belongs is yoga, the term referring to techniques applied to the 
hidden forces enclosed in one's organism. In order to clarify the 
difference between the divya and the vira, we may recall what a 
Tantric divya had to say: "What need do I have for an outer 
woman? I have an inner woman within myself." He does not 
practice the sexual rituals of the viras, who are rejoined with Shakti 
through sexual intercourse with a woman. Rather, he strives to 
awaken Shakti in his own body in order to achieve his goal. 

The peculiar characteristic of Tantric yoga lies in the valoriza- 
tion of the body. A classic expression of the Kularvana-Tantra is: 
"The body is the temple of the god. Jiva is Sadashiva [Shiva in his 
pure aspect of 'being']. He should give ignorance [avidya] away as 
if it were an offering, thinking in his heart: 'I am Him.'" In no way 
is the body to be considered an enemy, and in this context the 
method of pure intellectual contemplation is not recommended. 
Tantric schools, both Hindu and Buddhist, perceive the body in 
metaphysical terms and establish through it analogous magical 
relationships between the macro- and microcosm. These schools 
also try to achieve a supreme unity through the correct employ- 
ment of the body, which must be totally awakened, known, and 



66 



Pashu, Vira, and Divya: The Path of the Left Hand 

mastered, in its inner and occult dimension. The hierarchy of the 
body's elements and powers is believed to mark different stages on 
the way to the supreme goal. According to an Upanishadic saying, 
"Every god is enclosed here, in the body." We do not find here a 
contempt for the body, but rather its employment in the exploration 
of the secrets and of the powers that it contains. 

A further distinctive trait of Tantric yoga consists in a specific 
form of hatha yoga, called kundalini yoga, in which the acting 
principle is Shakti, who is present in the human organism. The key 
to a successful awakening and union with Shakti is to be found 
inside the human body: "Kundalini is the mainstay of all yoga 
practices." 21 This characterizes Tantric yoga over and against the 
yoga of knowledge, jnana yoga, or dhyana yoga. In the latter the 
body plays a subordinate role; it is valued only in the asanas, which 
are body postures facilitating meditation, and in the practice of 
pranayama, the control and regulation of breathing. Outside 
Tantrism, hatha yoga was and still is conceived as a body of tech- 
niques aimed at maintaining a healthy and strong organism. These 
techniques have a hygienic and therapeutic value, but no higher 
meaning, so it is proper to speak of "physical yoga." Hatha yoga 
has been and still is considered, at best, a preliminary or auxiliary 
phase in relation to the yoga of knowledge. That is because the 
prerequisites of the latter yoga are a perfect condition of the body 
and the absence of any disorder and of any organic imbalance that 
might interfere with the development of the spiritual process. By 
itself hatha yoga has no deeper value than any other gymnastic 
exercise. It is indicative of the intellectual level of most Westerners 
that yoga has enjoyed in these days a widespread popularity, both 
in the United States and in Europe, essentially under its trivial and 
ordinary physical aspects, with the exception of otherwise insignifi- 
cant occultist fads. 

In Tantrism, on the contrary, hatha yoga enjoys a different 
dignity, meaning, and role. As I have said, it becomes the yoga 
through which it is possible to shatter the ordinary level of con- 
sciousness, as well as to decondition one's being and to achieve 
transcendence. All this happens through a basic power in which 
both the mind and the vital strength of every individual are rooted. 
This power is called kundalini- shakti, which is Shakti's primordial 
and immanent "presence" in humans. Thus it becomes an integral 
and inseparable part of an authentic raja yoga, of the "royal yoga" 
in the nobler meaning of the word, which reminds us of an analo- 
gous designation used by one of the main European initiatory- 



67 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

esoteric currents, the Hermetic-alchemical ars regia. The term hatha, 
which implies the idea of violence, may establish a connection 
between royal yoga and the way proper to viras and kaulas. 

Some Tantric orders are inclined to believe that there is a sub- 
stantial difference between hatha yoga and other forms of yoga, not 
only in the method employed, but also as far as the general result 
is concerned. More specifically, hatha yoga is believed to grant an 
exceptional power over one's body. Not only it is said to produce 
jivanmukti, absolute liberation before the separation from the body 
following death, but also it is believed to grant the power to subdue 
the laws regulating organic decay, aging, and even death; to pro- 
long beyond normal limits the span of human life; to preserve all 
psycho-physical energies; and to have control over one's own life 
and death, owing to the real capability of committing suicide through 
an act of the will. The expression used here is "to put an end to the 
body's life without employing physical means." We shall deal later 
on with this power when discussing the exceptional siddhis that 
integrate the human will on the path of Tantric hatha yoga. 

Naturally, the chief problem associated with hatha yoga is that 
of establishing contact with those secret forces in the body consti- 
tuting the so-called occult corporeity. This is so because the vast 
majority of organic processes take place automatically. They also 
elude ordinary consciousness and are taken up again in the uncon- 
scious, both in their physical procedures and in their spiritual 
counterparts. Perhaps the designation of divya, as applied to those 
people commonly associated with yoga, refers not only to a spir- 
itual disposition but also to an existential condition. We are dealing 
here with a human type in whom the awareness of subtle forces at 
work in the organism has not yet been atrophied, as has happened 
in the course of time to most people. The type being alluded to is 
one for whom the doors of "occult corporeity" are not entirely 
barred, or better, one who is still capable of removing the barriers 
blocking access to it (more on this later). 

In order to avoid misunderstandings it is important to under- 
line that the opposition between hatha yoga and jnana yoga is not 
such that the former can be practiced without recourse to mental/ 
contemplative disciplines, and without disciplines that are sup- 
posed to strengthen the will. Such disciplines are the presupposi- 
tion of every type of yoga. Tantric yoga is indebted to Patanjali's 
yoga for several of its techniques, since without the mental power 
of intense concentration, as it is described in the Yoga-Sutras, it is 
not possible to remove the limits of ordinary sense perception and 



68 



Pashu, Vira, and Divya: The Path of the Left Hand 

to walk along the path. What is required of the vira in the Rudra- 
yamala is obviously required of the yogin too, namely, to be pure 
(shuchi), capable of proper discrimination (viveka), absolutely free 
from the inclinations typical of pashus, and capable of self-mastery 
regarding pleasure, pain, anger, and other passions. In the follow- 
ing chapter we shall focus on this preliminary work as well as on 
other aspects of some required qualifications. 



69 



VI 



ASSUMPTIONS 

BEHIND PRACTICE 

AND THE MEANS EMPLOYED 

The Experience of the Subtle 
Body: The Bodily Postures 



The overall Hindu view concerning the practice of authentic yoga 
may be summarized with these words: "Very few are qualified for 
yoga, and even fewer are those who succeed in it." That view, 
incidentally, should be kept in mind by those who are interested in 
the discipline at a higher level and are truly attracted to the spiri- 
tual horizons that yoga discloses. There seems to be a contrast, 
however, between the existential situation of single individuals and 
the metaphysical and general premises of nondualism. According 
to nondualism (monism), as well as to the theory advocated by the 
Upanishads, the dimension of transcendence, and of atma, is lo- 
cated within the human being. 

During the Middle Ages, Albertus Magnus, in reference to the 
efficacy of the rites employed for the achievement of the opus 
magnus, claimed that "one has to be predestined to this." Several 
other authors in the initiatory field have expressed their views in 
more or less the same terms. In some popular Indian expositions 
the same idea has been expressed by saying that the person who 
can really succeed in yoga must be endowed with privileged quali- 
ties, which have been acquired, through strenuous efforts, in previ- 
ous lives. Since I have already remarked that the doctrine of rein- 



70 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

carnation, from a metaphysical point of view, is totally groundless, 
we must conclude that these popular expositions merely convey the 
same idea and emphasize the need for a privileged, innate, and 
natural qualification. In this dimension what really matters are not 
intellectual fancies or mere wishes, but rather something organic 
and essential. Agrippa reminds us that "man's self-transcendence is 
the key to all magical practices and is the arcane, necessary, and 
secret thing required to engage in such practices." 1 Agrippa's view, 
I believe, is universally valid. Usually a distinction is made between 
"natural dignity" (in which, according to Agrippa, even some ele- 
ments determined by "fate" may play a role) and a dignity acquired 
through one's efforts, through a specific life-style, and even through 
"some religious practices." The privileged qualification, which I 
mentioned before, is even postulated in India, and it corresponds to 
the former; the process of an individual's self-transcendence corre- 
sponds to the latter. Both are related to what may be called "the 
true meaning of kingship" (rajabhava). In Tantrism, rajabhava corre- 
sponds to the presence, or to the memory or to the awakening, of 
the Shiva principle within oneself. In a commentary to the Samkya- 
Sutra, Vijnana Bikshu employed the simile of an exiled prince who, 
after growing up in a foreign country, all the while unsuspecting of 
his noble origins, suddenly becomes aware, and eventually certain, 
of being a king. The ritual of mandalas (graphic representations of 
various parts of the universe and of the forces at work in them) 
ends with the enthronement of their authors, who are given, in the 
center of these mandalas, a royal insignia. We may recall that the 
vajra, or dorje, which is employed in Tantric Buddhist and Tibetan 
ceremonies, signifies a scepter - again, a royal symbol. 

Three qualities are considered by classic yoga as well as by the 
Tantras: shraddha, virya, and vairagya. The latter, in this context, is 
the attitude of detachment, indifference, or contempt toward any- 
thing related to a narrow-minded, conditioned, impulsive, and dis- 
organized life-style. By adopting such an attitude, one establishes a 
certain distance between himself and the world, thus focusing on 
one's inner majesty. The highest form of vairagya consists in the 
discrimination between the "real" and the "unreal" (the "ephem- 
eral") and in the radical shift from one's identification with the 
"unreal" to identification with the "real." That distinction is in- 
spired by Sankhya: reality, immutability, and impassibility are syn- 
onyms, as well as the characteristics of the purushic nature, which 
is sovereign and "spectator." Shraddha is faith, in the positive sense 
of the term; it is understood as unshakable certainty, which leaves 



71 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

no room for doubts, wavering, or discouragements. Its counterpart 
is virya, namely, strength in an eminent sense, which is capable of 
establishing a continuity in one's behavior and actions. The texts 
say that two factors seriously undermine virya: fear and desire 
(including hope). The term virya may have the specific and techni- 
cal meaning (especially in Buddhism) of a force that does not 
belong to the samsaric plane and that empowers a person to go 
"countercurrent." As strange as it may seem, virya has been associ- 
ated with the phallus. This explains why Shaivist ascetics used to 
wear, as a symbol of their god, a pendant shaped like a phallus, or 
linga. The pendant signified virya, or virile strength, in the higher 
sense of the word. One of the recurrent misunderstandings in the 
modern history of religions consists in interpreting phallic cults in 
a priapic sense, that is, with an exclusive reference to physical 
procreation. These misunderstandings were incurred even in the 
case of Egyptian and Greco-Roman cemeteries (in which the phal- 
lus was often inscribed to represent the power of a hoped-for 
resurrection of the dead) and temples, in which the phallus was 
believed to neutralize or to avert "dark" and demonic influences. 
Natural and acquired dignity involve a certain degree of inner 
calm or of natural and regal impassibility. When strength {virya) is 
combined with impassibility, it may become what somebody de- 
scribed as a "cold, magical quality." At a certain level, that quality 
may even be strengthened by "renunciation." The deeper meaning 
of various precepts, which are usually understood in a mere mor- 
alistic fashion, here becomes apparent. Logically, renunciation is a 
factor of virya, of power, and of magical qualities, since it removes 
and destroys the human condition characterized by desire. The 
fundamental theory is that every desire or craving found in ordi- 
nary people is caused by a state of deprivation. The reason why 
people crave and become motivated by passion, greed, or desire to 
obtain something on which they eventually become dependent is 
that they feel deprived and in need of something. Obviously one 
cannot dominate or really possess a thing if, just in virtue of desir- 
ing, he becomes dependent on it and passive, in the face of the 
appeal it exercises on him. When one "renounces," or does not 
crave, or does not seek, the relationship between subject and object 
is turned around; what ensues is a state of self-sufficiency, whole- 
ness, and independence from things. At that time, it is said, rather 
than the subject going to the object, it is the object that is attracted 
to the subject. The object is drawn to the subject as if the latter were 
its "male" principle, or better, a stable, impassive, and sovereign 



72 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

principle, possessing a magically attractive power. Thus each re- 
nunciation - as long as it is issued from an inner disposition - puts 
a great power at one's disposal. The occult force that derives from 
it is called ojas. Renunciation is also needed in order to acquire the 
power to possess an object or to benefit from something without 
being bound by it. This is, as we may recall, the Tantric notion of 
enjoyment (bhoga), which does not impair one's inner being, and 
which discloses richer perspectives than those advocated by the 
arid Stoic ethics and by any religious asceticism. Some texts men- 
tion certain Shaktis, often personified as goddesses (yoginis or 
dakinis), that are irresistibly drawn to the merit generated by the 
renunciation, and that eventually join those who have practiced it. 
In principle, a Shakti does not offer herself to those who yearn for 
her, but rather comes, of her own will, to those who embody her 
spouse Shiva's calm and stable nature. 

I do not wish to dwell further on this topic, since I will discuss 
later the specific disciplines affecting the will. For now, I simply 
want to clarify the main aspects of what constitutes a "natural" and 
an "acquired" dignity. This distinction does not lie outside the 
dimension called "initiation," which corresponds to the "religious 
art" that Agrippa believed could bestow the dignity required to 
perform magical operations. 

The monist premises of Hindu metaphysics have underlined 
the decadence that has affected every domain of life, especially 
during the dark age, the Kali Yuga. As we all know, in the Chris- 
tian West it has been claimed that "grace" and enlightenment 
bestowed by God are the conditions required for "salvation" and 
for an authentically spiritual life, since all creatures have been 
infected and "paralyzed" by original sin. Initiatory teachings and 
Oriental metaphysics do not share the view of this dualistic my- 
thology. Generally speaking, however, they acknowledge the rela- 
tive transcendence, in regard to the faculties of ordinary men, of 
the power that is really operative at a supernatural level. Hence the 
notion of initiation, which is considered as the implant of a new 
principle and of a superindividual influence, which are manifested 
in the awakening and in a particular and efficient animation of 
one's being. In this we may recognize a special application of the 
Tantric principle according to which "without a Shakti, Shiva is 
inactive and unable to operate." Shiva here may symbolize the 
human being, and Shakti, his female complement, may represent 
the abovementioned influence. 

I have dealt at length with particular cases and with exceptions 

73 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

to the rule. Therefore we should not exclude that, in specific cir- 
cumstances, one may be able, through his own efforts, to obtain the 
same results and to activate an operating principle that does not 
belong to the samsaric current. On the contrary, early Buddhism 
has acknowledged the possibility of an autonomous realization, 
exemplified first and foremost by its founder, the historical Bud- 
dha, who was the prince Siddartha. Considering the progressive 
materialization of humankind in the course of history, and the 
consequent development of physical individuality, later forms of 
Buddhism, especially in the Mahayana tradition, have reaffirmed 
the concept of initiation (diksha) as the usual way to achieve one's 
integration. Initiation, therefore, is defined as a real transmission of 
a shakti, and as a power and a guiding light. While Catholicism 
professes that the apostolic succession and the continuity of grace 
ensure the sacraments' efficacy, in Hinduism there have been dy- 
nasties of spiritual teachers (gurus), who have uninterruptedly trans- 
mitted not only the tradition of their own schools but also the 
nonhuman power (shakti) that is required in order to expound and 
to activate that tradition. The image that this transmission evokes is 
that of a flame lighting another; spiritual organizations, called hulas 
within Tantrism, also follow the same principle. The power is often 
transmitted from the teacher to the novice through words of power 
(mantras), in which a shakti becomes intimately connected to a 
word, thus acquiring a vivifying and fertilizing quality; it propiti- 
ates a "second birth." 4 The nondualistic premise is reaffirmed, since 
this is a birth taking place within one's innermost being. Thus it has 
been suggested that "those who embrace a person who is initiated 
into the supreme brahman are embracing themselves." And during 
the ritual, the great saying from the Upanishads is whispered: 
"Thou art that" (tat tvam asi), and also: "Think within thyself that 
I am He and He is I. Free from all attachments [nir-mana, literally, 
devoid of the sense of mineness] and sense of self, go as thou 
pleasest as moved thereto by thy nature." 5 

When the texts insist on the necessity of seeking the aid of a 
guru following this "beginning," however, they may contain exag- 
gerations; some contingent circumstances may even play a role. 
Considering, for instance, that there were no books containing 
certain teachings, and that some books were difficult to find, the 
guru was practically the only source available, even for the most 
exoteric elements of the learning process. Whatever may be found 
in various teachings that cannot be transmitted through ordinary 
language or written expositions should not be overlooked. The 



74 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

same goes for the coded and multivalent character of some texts, 
which involve a hierarchy of interpretative levels. This set of cir- 
cumstances, too, dictates the need for a spiritual teacher. Finally, 
we must consider the continuous relations between a teacher and 
the person being initiated, besides the transmission of a power, 
which is not just the guru's own Shakti but rather a super- 
individual shakti, connected to the initiatory circle to which the 
guru himself belongs. A positive factor in these relations is the 
assistance provided in the face of dangers and obstacles, which can 
be foreseen and rightly evaluated only by one who has already had 
a firsthand experience and who is thus endowed with a high degree 
of competence. 

In any event, apart from the beginning, which may be consid- 
ered to be like the induction of the embryo of a supernatural power 
and light, spiritual development is the individual's responsibility. 
After this power has been completely assimilated and actualized, 
the development must reach a point where the novice becomes 
utterly independent from the teacher. Figuratively speaking, it is 
said that at the peak of fulfillment (siddhi) the disciple "has his 
own teacher under the feet," and that "the kaula is guru unto 
himself and nobody is superior to him." 

No matter in what way it has been achieved, initiation has the 
general meaning of a consecration. Some texts suggest not only that 
initiation influences the efficacy of sadhana and of the "acquired 
dignity," but also that, if initiation did not occur, sadhana and 
asceticism might assume an asura character, the term asura desig- 
nating a demonic, nondivine being (the Indo-Aryan equivalent of 
the Titans). 

As far as the technical instruments employed during sadhana 
are concerned, we may here recall the two main ones: the faculty to 
visualize precisely ("to see through the inner light") and the faculty 
to focus one's mind through a training similar to that practiced in 
dassical yoga. 

VISUALIZATION 

The first faculty, visualization, is particularly required for what in 
Tantric sadhana is related to images and to symbols to be activated. 
This is the power of imagination, understood as the power to see 
with the mind's eye any given form, in all its details, neatly, and 
not less clearly than through physical sight. At its highest level, it 
is the faculty of merging completely with a form or an image, until 



75 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

it alone lives in one's inner space. This faculty is to be nourished 
with an action similar to that exercised by a lens focusing the sun's 
rays on a spot, in which at the end, a flame is lit. At this level, we 
may speak of a "living imagination," or of a "magical imagination." 
The possibility of some yogic or magical feats, which the modern 
world considers to be fictitious, presupposes a human type in 
whom this faculty of living imagination has been developed to a 
degree unknown to most Westerners. A high degree of imagina- 
tion may still be found among primitive societies and in some 
uneducated people living in the countryside, as a residue from 
ancient times (primitive people should be considered the degener- 
ate remnants of an even older humanity). In the case of the average 
"civilized" Westerner, on the contrary, such a faculty has become 
greatly atrophied, parallel to the predominance that abstract thought 
and intellectuality have gained among them. This phenonemenon is 
related to a structural modification of the peculiar relationship 
between the sympathetic system and the brain, or better, the deeper 
strata of the brain. 

The forms in which a vivid imagination is habitually found in 
many people do not concern sadhana because they are passive 
forms. This is what happens in dreams and in hypnotic phenom- 
ena. Any person who dreams automatically demonstrates a posses- 
sion, at least potentially, of the faculty to imagine and to visualize, 
although the person cannot activate, use, and direct that faculty at 
will. The same goes for hypnotic phenomena. In a hypnotic state 
almost everyone appears to possess, at least in potency, an imagi- 
nation similar to the living and magical imagination, although it 
displays itself only when the conscious personality is suspended 
and when the imagination is activated by another person, namely, 
the hypnotist. 

We should make the same considerations concerning the acti- 
vation of the imagination by special substances, such as marijuana 
and hallucinogenic drugs, in the course of a limited time span. 
These substances merely induce chaotic visions. Only with the aid 
of particular substances, and with the categorical requirements of a 
special preparation and of a favorable "personal equation," may the 
results be different. We shall learn in due time that the secret ritual 
of the viras includes the use of intoxicating beverages. And again, 
only at special times and with the obvious motivation of exculpat- 
ing themselves from the charge of indulging in orgies, the viras 
claim that the goals that they pursue in the course of various 
ceremonies are the enlivenment of the imagination and the im- 



76 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

provement of the visualization of images, especially those of devatas. 
In these cases, intoxicating beverages play only an auxiliary role. 
The essential purpose of their ritual use does not bear a relation to 
the specific problem being here considered, namely, that of the 
awakening of the imagination when that faculty is absent from the 
very beginning. This essential purpose consists in the induction of 
a state that in ancient Greece was known by a term carrying a 
positive connotation, mania. This state was characterized by a "di- 
vine enthusiasm" and by a feeling of rapture similar to that expe- 
rienced in Dionysianism and in the Dionysian use of wine and of 
sacred orgies for initiatory purposes. 

When it is a matter of training and of developing a faculty that 
is partially present, some methods are indicated, such as recollec- 
tion. One should first focus on an object located before one's eyes, 
and then try, after closing the eyes, to see it only with the mind's 
eye. In a following exercise, after opening the eyes, one should see 

o 

the object "out there" in space, as if it were a real thing. In all 
likelihood, many psychiatrists would consider this exercise as a 
way to induce hallucinations. In so doing, however, they would 
miss the main point: what are being propitiated through this method 
are not compulsive and involuntary processes, as in the case of real 
hallucinations. Usually, the result being sought is exactly the oppo- 
site of becoming a victim of one own's imagination. 

We may also consider cases such as a sudden enlightenment, 
for instance, the one experienced, in the case of physical sight, by 
the surgical removal of cataracts. The cause of such an experience 
may be the adding up of imponderable factors until they reach a 
critical breaking point, or even a successful contact with certain 
supernatural influences, which confer to the phenomenon an initia- 
tory meaning. This is what apparently happened to Gustav Meyrink, 
the author of interesting novels with initiatory overtones. Meyrink 
had practiced yogic techniques for a long time without satisfactory 
results, because he used to think with words, like many other 
intellectuals, and was unable to see figures, forms, and colors through 
the mind's eye. Meyrink had given up those techniques when one 
day, finding himself in a peaceful state of mind before a winter 
landscape, he had a vision: he saw in the sky a figure in the 
characteristic crossed-legs posture that is attributed to Buddha. 
That was for him the sudden, miraculous opening of the mind's 
eye. He felt like a horse who had started to gallop after sleepily 
walking along for a long time. 

As far as visualizations are concerned, the Tibetan Tantras 



77 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

distinguish two procedures. The first is the sudden "projection" of 
the whole image, which is compared to a fish darting out of water. 
The second is gradual; the image is composed a part at a time, since 
each part, or each attribute in the case of a personified ritual image, 
must act almost as if it were added fuel, which intensifies the 
mental fire. 9 

The importance of the imagination consists in being the neces- 
sary instrument, allowing one to move on the subtle plane. Some 
people, through the intensity of their imagination and their power 
of concentration on a single image, eventually become removed 
from physical perceptions and from the sense of their own bodies 
and come to "see" only through their inner light. To these people 
it is given to enter in contact with forces that belong to the order of 
things that includes the "mental body" and the "body of life," as 
well as things such as "names," "seals," and "elements," which I 
have mentioned when dealing with the Tantric worldview. The 
entire cult, in the evocative sense found at the highest levels of 
Tantrism, consists of animations caused by the power of the magi- 
cal and living imagination. The same can be said about the bodily 
postures (asanas) and the ritual gestures (mudras). We may apply 
here the Tantric principle according to which the human Shiva is 
almost paralyzed and unable to act, unless he is connected with this 
Shakti. 

A particular application of the power of visualization concerns 
what in China has been called "to act without acting." For clarity's 
sake let us refer to our own bodies. As we all know, there are two 
ways to move the body; one way is direct, through an order trans- 
mitted by the brain. The other is indirect, flowing out of a reflex, 
and is induced by an idea, through the imagination. An example of 
the latter may be the physiological and mimic rebound caused in a 
spectator by the sight of a trapeze artist's sudden fall. Another 
example is the physiological phenomenon of sexual arousal, which 
may be induced by evoking in one's mind erotic scenes. These 
examples, as well as many others, testify to an "effortless" aspect of 
the imagination that controls movement, and that should be distin- 
guished from the muscular-volitive action, which is capable of 
reaching domains precluded to the latter. 

A particular importance is given to the development of this 
faculty, since it may affect various domains; the faculty of moving 
or of determining things through an act of the mind, with "images- 
commands," effortlessly and without recourse to what may be 
called one's jivalike physical will. A relation may be eventually 



78 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

established with the notion of vajra, the "diamond thunderbolt" 
which Tibetan Buddhism employs in its operating procedures. 

Let us now deal with the second fundamental instrument, 
represented by the capability of unifying and focusing the mind. 

UNIFICATION OF THE MIND 

It is easier to achieve results through unifying the mind than through 
visualization. In yoga manuals, Patanjali's included, we find the 
outline of a corresponding gradual discipline. 10 The starting point 
is usually represented by five states of mind: 

1. Unstable, changing, wavering (ksipta-chitta) 

2. Inattentive, confused (mudha) 

3. Occasionally focused (vikshipta) 

4. Gathered in only one spot (ekagriya or ekagrata) 

5. Completely mastered (niruddha) 

The first two states are found predominantly in the common 
person, in the pashu. Rather than thinking, such a person "is 
thought"; various impressions arise, develop, create patterns, pro- 
liferate, and eventually disappear within him in a kaleidoscopic 
vortex over which he has little or no control, and by which he is 
carried. A well-known Hindu simile is that of a monkey that is 
difficult to catch, since it ceaselessly jumps from branch to branch. 
The third state (vikshipta), even though it belongs to ordinary life, is 
a different case. There are situations in which the mind successfully 
concentrates and remains alert for a short while, as in the case of 
watching a theater production, or reading something interesting, or 
being absorbed in a certain feeling or preoccupation, or trying to 
solve a problem or to recognize a sound, or remembering some- 
thing, and so on. This state, too, is not a positive one. Here, in fact, 
what takes place is a "passive attentiveness," since it is the object 
itself, or a given interest, that originates the momentary concentra- 
tion. Anyone will agree with me, simply by trying to concentrate on 
something that he considers absolutely irrelevant to his life; after a 
minute or two, he will catch his mind wandering somewhere else. 

Only in the fourth state, in which one actively concentrates on 
one spot (ekagriya), does the mind begin to be a useful instrument 
for yoga and for sadhana in general. This state, however, is not easy 
to achieve. When the Hindu texts describe ekagriya as something 
that is naturally presupposed in the disciple or in their readers, 



79 



"THE YOGA OF POWER 

they should not be misunderstood; one may achieve ekagriya only 
through perseverance and tireless application. 

The discipline that is employed consists in reducing to a mini- 
mum the role that the first two states play in ordinary life. This 
is done in order to bring about a stable and continuous self- 
awareness, as well as a methodical de-identification with the sensa- 
tions (vrittis), and also with the fluctuating and mobile contents of 
inner and outer experiences. The goal is achieved when the passive 
and scattered states are removed, and they cease to be habitual 
states of consciousness; at this point, the obtuse coalescence of the 
I with mental modifications has finally been overcome. The follow- 
ing are the recommended initial exercises that lead to de-identifica- 
tion. 

With a calm mind, leave thoughts to themselves. Witness the 
sight of various mental associations being formed spontaneously 
and capriciously, without losing your self-awareness; do not dis- 
turb them, but do not let them carry you away. Carefully avoid 
entertaining or developing any thought that solicits your imagina- 
tion. It may be useful to reformulate mentally the thoughts that 
knock at your mind's doors, by saying: "So there! Now I have this 
thought, and previously I have entertained that thought," and so 
on. Since, at the beginning, it often happens that the mind wanders 
off, when that happens, one should not go on. Instead of starting 
from the very last thought, one should rather attempt to reconstruct 
the path of the fleeing thoughts that have preceded the last thought, 
and then start again from the point in which one enjoyed self- 
awareness. 

Some texts refer to this technique as the "shepherd's exercise." 
One's inner attitude resembles that of a shepherd who leads his 
flock to the pasture and lets it roam free, without ever losing sight 
of it. The positive result is achieved - this too is an image found in 
the texts - when one experiences a feeling similar to the one expe- 
rienced by a calm person who sits on the bank of a river and 
watches the water flow by. 

The same result is achieved through another method, the so- 
called cutting-off method. One must remain alert and suppress 
every thought and mental image, as soon as it surfaces in the mind, 
just as a quick, clean slash with a sickle easily mows down a blade 
of grass. Whenever a new thought surfaces, it should be dealt with 
the same way. After a while, if one successfully persists, he will 
eventually witness a sort of flight of thoughts and images; this is 
the "view of the fleeing enemy," which is contingent on the I be- 



80 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

coming detached from the contents of its own consciousness. One 
will thus find himself in the same final condition arrived at in the 
previous exercise, experiencing the peaceful state of mind of one 
who sits by a river's bank, watching the water flow by. 11 

These exercises ought to be applied eventually to ordinary 
situations, which are particularly plagued by associative auto- 
matisms. I am referring to mental contents that take form and 
succeed one another while one is traveling from one place to an- 
other, or while eating, getting dressed, and so on. These contents 
are habitually consumed moment by moment, and the subject is 
rarely aware of them (the proof is that if one suddenly halts the 
mental flow, he will hardly remember what he was thinking about 
just moments ago). 

An analogous de-identification is postulated in regard not only 
to mental modifications but to emotional states as well. The task 
here is much more difficult. It consists in objectifying and looking 
at one's own feelings and emotions, as if in a mirror. The path that 
leads the apprentice, little by little, to the goal does not consist in 
taking upon oneself the most recent feelings, emotions, or impulses, 
not even as they occur, but it consists in assuming those past ones, 
which arose in different circumstances. They are to be regarded 
with calm and detachment, as if they were somebody else's. This is 
done by imagining them to arise, develop, and become transformed 
into another person, for whom we care little. Thus, slowly, one 
becomes inclined to adopt the same attitude even regarding analo- 
gous present states. 12 

At this level, one should experience as natural and normal the 
following realizations of sadhana: a calm presence unto oneself, the 
dissociation of the I from chittavrittis, and a remarkable reduction of 
the ksipta-chitta and of the mudha-chitta states. 

This yoga training is the necessary antecedent to the practice of 
classical yoga, according to the doctrine expounded in Patanjali's 
Yoga-Sutras and eventually clarified in several commentaries to riis 
work. This yoga is a system in itself; generally speaking, the tech- 
niques expounded in it are believed to be sufficient to lead the 
apprentice to total liberation, at least according to one of its inter- 
pretations, which was heavily influenced by San khy a. When con- 
sidering the classical phases of mental concentration and of yogic 
contemplation, I will not put the emphasis on classical yoga's per- 
spectives (the subject matter of this book, after all, is Tantrism) and 
on their actualization. I believe in fact, that they merely constitute 
a necessary instrument to sadhana in general; they also happen to 



81 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

foster the living imagination, which I have already discussed. The 
power I am going to discuss has been called samyama, and it devel- 
ops through some phases of sadhana that I want to describe briefly. 
I had mentioned previously that it approximately corresponds to 
the acquisition of a power that in some European philosophical 
circles is called "intellectual intuition." This intuition consists in the 
identification of knowing and being beyond the external, sensible, 
mental, and phenomenal forms that are encountered in ordinary 
experiences. 

The first phase of the process of realization, pratyahara, is the 
actualization of the mind's de-identification from various impres- 
sions and stimuli. The object is to gather the mind in itself, in its 
substance, through the power of excluding, at will, sensory impres- 
sions and mental modifications. The theory behind it is not that one 
sees through the eye or hears through the ear, but that it is the 
manas that sees through the eye, hears through the ear, and so on. 
Thus it is possible for the manas to withdraw from these sensory 
organs. It withdraws, in the first place, in order to focus the mind 
on an inner object; second, in order to perceive sensations and 
feelings in their true nature; and last, in order to achieve a state 
analogously called "silent." 

As far as the second state is concerned, I have already men- 
tioned this power when speaking of the stripping of passions and 
emotions, which is practiced in the Path of the Left Hand. The term 
employed in yoga to define mental modifications is vritti. The 
assumption behind this term is that in the course of the habitual 
identification of the I with its experiences, the subject perceives 
only weak reflections, while the real source of the corresponding 
processes is to be found in one's heart. That the Chinese ideogram 
for "thought" is the same as that for "heart" may or may not be 
related to this, or may be a faint echo. Something of this sort is also 
documented in the ancient Egyptian language. When the mind, 
through pratyahara, withdraws inside itself, it is said that ideas and 
thoughts may be perceived in a flash of pure energies that are 
issued from a central part of the body and that strike the brain. 
After all, this is suggested by the term vritti, which does not liter- 
ally mean "modification," "state," or "form," but rather "whirlwind" 
or "vortex." Thus, in relation to the abovementioned experience, 
the Tantric Tibetan texts describe thoughts as meteorites, or as 
flying arrows, and even as flashes. 

As far as the "silent" state pursued by manas is concerned, it 
is the state in which the spirit calmly rests within itself. We may 



82 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

think of the relationship between the I and thought as being analo- 
gous to the relationship between the I and speech. As silence ordi- 
narily consists in refraining from talking and in not activating 
speech, likewise, one should refrain here from activating thought 
and keep it still and gathered. The various thoughts that follow one 
another in ordinary life might be compared to talking instinctively 
and randomly. In pratyahara, through a calm action, talking chaoti- 
cally is suspended: one remains silent, experiencing the mind's 
inner silence. Such a silence usually precedes and follows every 
session of sadhana. 

The second phase of the process of realization, dharana, may be 
considered a development of ekagriya. The stasis of the mind gath- 
ered in itself is shattered, and the spirit now focuses on only one 
object, excluding everything else, including sensory impressions, 
thoughts, and causal mental associations. In order to distinguish 
dharana from ekagriya, which consists in the mind focusing on only 
one place, it is necessary to relate dharana to the third and follow- 
ing phase of the process of realization, which is called dhyana; this 
third phase has a noetic character and a cognitive penetration of the 
chosen object. In itself, dharana is sometimes thought of as a pro- 
cess facilitating hypnosis, since it is believed to neutralize thought 
and to free purely spiritual energy, which is thus enabled to act 
without being bound to the senses. Thus, Vyana suggests that the 
places that may be the basis of dharana are the top of the head, the 
navel, the tip of the nose, the roof of the palate, or even an external 
object or sound. 14 Obviously, the process of isolating oneself from 
external impressions, like hypnosis, is just a means to an end. Yoga 
has absolutely nothing to do with any hypnotic or trancelike state. 
Yoga, on the contrary, pursues a greater consciousness and a higher 
than normal clearheadedness. 

Another possibility, always within the context of dharana, con- 
sists in assuming the same object, image, symbol, or phenomenon 
chosen for the following phase, or dhyana, as the basis or the 
support for the neutralization of thoughts. What will ensue is some 
kind of continuity, and the passage from a merely technical phase 
to a phase of spiritual realization. One should not attempt, at first, 
to neutralize those thoughts that are connected to the brain and to 
one's detachment from external factors. One should rather consider 
that the total absorption of the I into the object to be disclosed leads 
automatically to the spirit's release from all bonds. 

The third phase of the process of realization, dhyana, is the 
third articulation (anga) of classical yoga. It consists in the assimi- 



83 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

lation and in the actual interiorization of the object that is contem- 
plated. Here, the absolute unity and continuity of the mental cur- 
rent is especially stressed. According to a simile that I have already 
employed, this current resembles a solar ray, which a lens focuses 
on the same spot, without interruption, at the right distance, until 
the object situated in the mind catches fire. This therefore has 
nothing to do with hypnotic suggestion - which can only be, as I 
have said, an auxiliary and subordinated tool - but is rather an 
essentially intellectual and suprarational process. The object must 
be penetrated in all of its aspects and examined from every possible 
perspective, letting it say what it is in its essence. One will then be 
able to perceive it in its unity and in a synthesis that regards its 
existence as secondary. Another image that may be employed is 
that of a welding torch aimed at one spot until the metal melts. The 
metal, in this case, symbolizes what in the object is external, sen- 
sible, or perceived by the imagination. 

The fourth and last phase is called samadhi. If we employ again 
the simile of the welding torch, samadhi would correspond to the 
moment in which the fusion takes place. In it, the idam element 
(= otherness) of the object is finally removed. Also, the cognitive act 
and the object of contemplation cease to be distinct, just as a differ- 
ence cannot be established between the image of a thing and its 
essence. We are here projected beyond the sensible world of phe- 
nomena, beyond the subjective world of thoughts and of simple 
imaginations. The element called "form" is eliminated, and what 
remains is the essence (artha) of a thing, or the power (shakti) of a 
thing, figure, or symbol. What remains is the power of what was 
placed in the "fire" of the process, which is now revealed to the 
apprentice, in a direct and eminently objective experience. 

The term samadhi is used prevalently in the context of jnana 
yoga. Tantrism, on the other hand, employs more frequently the 
term bhava, which has a technical meaning (otherwise bhava may 
signify "nature," "disposition," or "state"). Bhava is said to be the 
essential organ in Shakti's dimension, since the shakti of everything 
that appears as "other" is revealed only through it. Without bhava, 
according to the Kauvali-Tantra, it is impossible to acquire a high 
degree of competence in the kaulas' doctrine. One text declares that 
whoever is capable of realizing a perfect bhava does not need any- 
thing else, since he already possesses the organ for the real knowl- 
edge of Shakti. It is only natural that such a state may be difficult 
to understand for those who have never experienced it, one way or 
another. It is said: "How can the true nature of bhava be expressed 



84 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

in words? Bhava cannot be described. Words can only indicate the 
direction in which it is to be found." 

There are various degrees in the process of spiritual realiza- 
tion, depending on the object that has been chosen. If the basis 
consists in an object of sensory experience, in order to arrive at 
bhava it is necessary to go through a double process of abstraction. 
At first the object, as it is perceived by the senses, is excluded; once 
every other representation of this object is excluded through 
pratayahara, what remains is only an image. Once this image is 
contemplated and animated in one's inner light, this very support, 
or facsimile, is abolished, in the same way that physical perception 
was suppressed. The consequence is the arising of some kind of 
secondary reflection, which is formless and immaterial, and from 
which bhava eventually develops. Bhava corresponds to the "form- 
less" or "causal" plane (arupa, karana), while the previous reflec- 
tion, which may be attributed to the phase of dhyana, corresponds 
to the subtle plane. 

When the starting point is not a physical object but an inner 
object, namely, an image, a feeling, and so forth, such a starting 
point consists in the neutralization of the outer sensibility; what is 
left are the two remaining phases. 

Commentators on Patanjali's Yoga-Sutras distinguish various 
degrees of samadhi. The reference point consists in the state in 
which the object, the concept, or the representation appears radi- 
cally distinct from its name. The lower form of samadhi (or bhava's 
samadhi) is one in which the concept and its name still subsist, and 
both of them are conditioned by a specific existence, culture, lan- 
guage, and time period. Thus the real nature of the object is still 
hidden behind a veil. This nature is grasped in the higher form of 
samadhi, called nirvitarka. In this form the object is stripped of any 
association with names and with concepts, through an intensifica- 
tion of the intellectual fire, and is also stripped of the same rela- 
tionship with a specific being's I. Therefore, it is penetrated into the 
essential nakedness of its own nature (svarupa). We may say that, 
in this context, the magic of maya, in the Vedantic understanding 
of the word, is shattered. Therefore, the human sight participates 
in the nature of Shiva's sight; Shiva, with his symbolic frontal 
("cyclopic") eye, destroys everything that in the manifestation clothes 
and covers nescience. A parallel to this notion may be found in the 
ancient Greek notion of the "Olympian stare," or nous, to which the 
higher reality of the so-called kosmos noetos is revealed over and 
beyond the world of phenomena. The yogic technical term samyama 



85 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

is employed to describe the whole process, which includes dharana, 
dhyana, and samadhi. 

If samyama is applied to sensible objects, the bhava state, in its 
perfection, may put the apprentice in direct and experimental con- 
tact with the transcendental elements and with the principles of the 
senses and of the sensible objects (tanmatras and mahabhutas). 15 These 
contacts correspond either to as many forms of knowledge-enlight- 
enment (prajna) or to perceiving faculties, which are not condi- 
tioned by the body's organs. 16 Mention is made of the possibility of 
seeing without eyes, touching without hands, hearing without ears, 
arriving without departing, and so on. In the third book of the 
Yoga-Sutras these various possibilities of samyama are described in 
detail. 

It must be acknowledged that the term samyama may be used 
to refer to an extraordinary and enlightening knowledge both of the 
powers and of the essences that are manifested in the external 
world, and also of those powers and essences whose manifestation 
habitually takes place within the realm of feelings and emotions. 
Samyama may also be focused on powers and entities that are found 
on planes and on existential levels having no immediate corre- 
spondence to ordinary human experiences. In this case the basis for 
the process of disclosure consists in symbols, figures, sounds, and 
signs, which are described by various esoteric traditions. The magi- 
cal procedures of Tantric rituals and of hatha yoga are essentially 
based on this material, which is described in esoteric traditions and 
which is outlined in a direct teaching. 

I hope that my exposition of the articulations of classical yoga 
has helped the reader to believe in the existence of processes that 
are properly ordained to the supreme goal and that consist in the 
liberation of the I and in the deconditioning of one's being (Tantrism 
follows a different path from that of hatha yoga). Several forms of 
samadhi must be distinguished. The faculty necessary to make this 
distinction is attributed to the highest of these forms. This form is 
not applied to particular objects or goals; it no longer has any 
"support"; and it is ordained only to the knowledge-realization of 
atma. As far as my research is concerned, I shall focus only on those 
elements concerning the formation of a working tool; such, in fact, 
is the power of samyama in an elementary and approximate form, 
since it feeds the mental fire in order to promote the development 
of an extrasensory perception. 

In regard to hatha yoga, one of the first applications of this 
instrument concerns one's own body. The goal is to gradually 



86 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

acquire a subtle perception of it and of the forces acting in it. One 
of the misunderstandings that the yoga practiced in the West has 
generated is to believe in the existence of physical methods leading 
to spiritual realizations. This is absolutely preposterous; when the 
Hindu texts speak about the physique, they are actually referring to 
something very different from what our contemporaries, especially 
modern Europeans, mean by that term. One of its obvious prem- 
ises, which does not even need to be enunciated, is that a yoga 
apprentice's body was, and still is to a greater extent, penetrated by 
the I, and that it was, or still is, more intimate and disclosed to the 
I in its subtle dimension. Thus even the physical procedures consid- 
ered by yoga have implications that are not merely physical. 

In any event, exercises promoting an intense concentration are 
indicated. These exercises focus on functions, organs, or particular 
areas of the body in order to systematically expand one's conscious- 
ness by moving into the organic unconscious. The result is the 
dematerialization and the shift onto a subtle plane of what is com- 
monly called coenesthesia (the overall sensation of the organism). 

Breathing is particularly important in all this, considering the 
role it plays in almost every form of yoga, especially in kundalini 
yoga. The effectiveness of the control of breathing (pranayama) 
presupposes a contact with the subtle dimension; what truly mat- 
ters in yogic practice, with the exception of exercises found in mere 
physical yoga, is the breath that is the life force (prana), and not 
breath in its coarse form (sthula). Training consists in lying down, 
relaxing, and waiting for breath, once completely abandoned to 
itself, to assume a regular rhythm, "as in a sleeping child." At this 
time, one should begin to progressively concentrate on one's breath- 
ing. According to the texts, the sensation of prana is analogous to 
that of a diffused light; it may generate the feeling of warmth in the 
following phase, when this interiorization shifts from the breathing 
function to the related function of blood circulation. At this phase, 
one's level of consciousness has already shifted. We shall learn how 
in yoga, one's breath is considered a vehicle to go from ordinary 
waking consciousness to deeper forms of consciousness, which are 
kept hidden from common people by the dreaming state and by 
various levels of sleep. 

This consciousness is thought to be the way to enter within 
one's body, to experience that life which is usually beyond and 
outside one's reach. This descent takes place in a natural way every 
night when we fall asleep, or better, when we yield to sleep. But 
ordinary consciousness is not able to keep up with this change of 



87 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

state and of level; it is barred from entering it, as if it was guarded 
by a stern angel standing by the Tree of Life. 19 Only when the 
power of abstraction and of contraction has developed beyond a 
certain level may this situation be partially modified. Some forms 
of meditation are suggested as a starting point. I will just mention 
one of them. 

At night, before going to sleep, one should visualize a sun that 
gradually rises above the horizon until it reaches all of its splendor 
in the middle of a fully lit sky. The image should be vivid and filled 
with the feeling of one's being elevated, opening up, and becoming 
illuminated. One should also think that such a mental image corre- 
sponds to what will really take place in the deep of the night, when 
that midnight sun, known also to ancient Western mysteries, shines 
with all its radiance. The zenith of this sun should be conceived as 
the point in which one's identification with the light and with a 
sense of liberation has become perfect. One should then try to fall 
asleep right away, before other images or other thoughts may crop 
up in the mind. Early in the morning, once completely awake, one 
should image the midnight sun and make it descend from its zenith 
to its setting (which in this inversion corresponds to the rising of 
the sun). One should also feel that the light that fades away when 
the physical daily light begins to shine, lights up within one's self 
and keeps shining during one's waking state. In this fashion, one 
generates a sense of a light opposite to that which shines in the 
natural world and which allows the physical eyes to see. 

Such a practice is believed to enhance the subtle perception of 
one own's body and life as well as an initial integration of con- 
sciousness in a state that corresponds to sukshma-sharira. This is the 
beginning of a process that renders one's body subtle; what ensues 
is a particular feeling of freshness and lightness. The tamasic 
element begins to be substituted by the tejasic element (tejas = 
radiating energy). 

In a later phase of the same nocturnal and morning contempla- 
tion, the light should eventually be turned into warmth. This warmth, 
as one approaches samyama, should dissipate and leave as the only 

90 

residue, in a cold brilliance, a bare, solar, absolute "I am." 

In the practice with prana it is important to try to gradually 
feel this warmth within the whole body, during inspiration and 
retention (more or less prolonged) of breath. The texts say that one 
should feel prana, the inner breath, as a tingling sensation on the 

9 1 

palms of the hands and on the soles of the feet. In the context of 
pranic sensation of one's body, the special objects of practice are the 



88 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

five vayus, currents or breaths, which I discussed in Chapter IV. 
Obviously, for this kind of experience it is necessary to be in contact 
with a depository of the corresponding traditional teachings. The 
definitions of the five vayus in the texts are complicated and often 
divergent, and therefore it is difficult to adopt a corresponding 
sadhana. The teachings concerning the sushumna, ida, and pingala, 
which I shall introduce later, are more univocal. 

In some Tibetan yoga texts dealing with the experience of the 
"bright light" (hodgsal), one may find an intensification of practice 
through the contemplation of the nocturnal sun. This experience 
corresponds to the experience of the subtle state, which is encoun- 
tered "in the interval between the end of the experience of the 
waking state and the beginning of the sleeping state." When ready 
to go to sleep, one must assume the "lion posture," which was also 
recommended by early Buddhism. In it, one lies on the right side. 
With the mind, one must move to the middle seat, corresponding 

99 

to the heart. In this seat one should be open to every reflection 
from the outside world, every image, every residual thought, until 
one reaches a state of calm concentration. The procedure outlined 
in the Tantric Tibetan texts is very complex and consists of several 
visualizations. First is the visualization of Shakti, which one should 
identify with one own's body. Next is the visualization of a four- 
petaled lotus flower in the heart, with the five mantras inscribed, 
the first in the middle, the others on the four petals (in order to 
position these sacred syllables correctly, the apprentice, facing north, 
will put AH on the northern petal, NU on the eastward petal, TA on 
the southward petal, and RA on the westward petal). The letters 
must be well written, bright, and shining. When sleep approaches, 
the calm and concentrated mind will go from one mantra to the 
next, and finally it will settle in the middle, on HUM, journeying 
along the Tibetan sign, moving from the bottom upward, and even- 
tually landing in the little crescent and in the circle located at its 
upper corner; this circle, in this graphic symbol, represents shunya, 

9 "\ 

"emptiness" or transcendence. All of the mantras are visualized in 
the form of Tibetan letters and not in their transcription in the 
Western alphabet. Whether they have any objective effectiveness or 
not is strictly contingent on the level of spiritual awareness found 
in a Tibetan person. 

The unanimous consent is that the bright light is found in the 
middle seat. The text to which I just referred calls the ensuing 
change of state, when sleep supervenes, "ignition," and calls the 
point of deep sleep, which corresponds to a further change of state, 



89 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

"completion." If consciousness could follow all these phases, it too 
would experience that absolute light which dazzles after death. 
The state of ignition mentioned in the text visibly corresponds to 
the warm phase, which we indicated as that into which runs, 
through intensification, the bright perception of the subtle state. 

A more simplified practice, which a Tantric Buddhist text indi- 
cates, consists in imagining one own's body as the body of Buddha 
Vajrasattva (whose substance is vajra, the "diamond thunderbolt") 
and in focusing the mind on the calm, empty state when one is 
about to fall asleep. It is interesting to notice the counterpart at the 
time of the awakening: in it, one should evoke "Shiva's two-sided 
drum," which echoes in the middle of the sky, proclaiming the 
words of power of the twenty-four heroes (divine figures of the 
Tibetan pantheon). When one emerges from the sleep state "in this 
state of the divine body," each surrounding thing should be consid- 
ered as a sign or symbol (mandala) of itself, as Vajrasattva. A 
cosmic and powerful feeling arises as a consequence of practice 
when it is successful in establishing a communication of the waking 
consciousness with the superindividual consciousness that is bur- 
ied in the sleeping state. This is not without relation to the formu- 
lation found in another text, which talks about the "shining of a 
bright light over the path followed during the day." This shining 
represents the insertion of the luminous, subtle consciousness in 
the various forms of sadhana. At that point the flux of mental 
formations stops and generates enlightened moments. One text 
describes the "unobscured, primordial condition of the mind, which 
shineth in interval between the cessation of one thought-formation 
and the birth of the next." 25 

Having previously considered teachings and practices concern- 
ing the body, I will now explain the meaning of the so-called asanas 
that are found in yoga. These are postures conferring to the body 
maximum stability and producing a feeling of well-being, so that 
one may retain them for a long time, remaining still, without effort 
and without getting tired. There are many asanas - the texts men- 
tion thirty of them. The most employed ones are padma-asana and 
siddha-asana. The latter differs from the former in that in padma- 
asana the feet, instead of simply lying one upon the other, are 
intertwined; the right foot rests on the left thigh, next to the groin, 
with the sole facing upward; the left foot rests on the right thigh, 
in an analogous way. Usually asanas are associated with mudras, 
signs or gestures that are given the meaning of "seals" (this is the 
literal meaning of the term mudra). Two mudras often associated 



90 



Assumptions behind Practice and the Means Employed 

with the two aforesaid asanas are (1) the gesture of the hands 
resting on the knees with the tip of the thumb touching the tip of 
the index finger, thus forming a circle, while the other fingers are 
extended; and (2) the hands are overlapping, horizontally, the right 
hand over the left, at the height of the navel, palms facing upward. 
Sometimes the term mudra is used as if synonymous with asana. 
There are three kinds of asanas; a coarse (sthula) mudra, a subtle 
(sukshma) mudra, and a supreme (para) mudra. The first is executed 
with the aid of physical limbs; in the second, a "word of power" 
(mantra) matches the gesture; the last is a seal that is realized even 
in its metaphysical substance. In the Bhavonopanishad (21-24) vari- 
ous mudras (= asanas) are associated with various chakras, or 
occult centers, more on which later. 

When I said that asanas are natural, pleasant, and effortless 
body postures, this must be understood in a relative sense. They 
may become so once the subject gets used to them, which may take 
a long time (especially for people who are not Indians, since people 
from India are accustomed to using similar postures even in ordi- 
nary life). The most important aspect in the employment of asanas 
and especially of mudras is a ritualistic and magical one. 

First of all, asana may be considered a further development of 
a preliminary discipline, which consists in the suppression of un- 
necessary and random movements and in the full control of one's 
nerves and muscles. The yogin eliminates fluttering and disorderly 
thoughts (which are the first two stages of chitta), as well as any 
instinctive, untidy gesture, stemming from a natural desire to com- 
municate. He is reserved and carries no trace on his face of either 
thoughts or feelings, by virtue of exercising a total control of the 
facial muscles until he reaches the typically Aryan imperturbability 
of a statue. 

Asanas are designed to promote a similar imperturbability in 
the entire body. This is not all. When it is said that asanas may be 
grasped in their true nature only through a guru, a spiritual teacher, 
it is implied that what really matters in them is the meaning of the 
gesture and the symbolic-ritualistic meaning of the posture. This is 
because through it, as Mircea Eliade correctly remarked, man tends 
to incarnate a god, to become transformed into its image, if not 
almost into its statue, or to reproduce a given aspect of it. Thus 
asanas are not without relation to the Tantric yoga habit of identi- 
fying one's body with the body of a given deity (devata) at the 
beginning of every practice session. The starting point is a vivified 
and somewhat magical image, which the bodily gesture ritually 



91 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

reproduces. On this basis, in the body's stillness there is something 
almost magical, while various relationships between the prank 
currents in the body and the forces found in nature are reproduced 
in the various postures. The "seal," in this context, represents the 
closing of a circuit, which determines a specific fluid state. Also, 
this theory of the asanas has a parallel in the hieratic stillness 
attested to in several ancient Western traditions. In the doctrine 
concerning the ancient Egyptian kingship, for instance, stability 
and stillness (expressed by the hieroglyphic ded) were conceived as 
a real, supernatural fluid flowing within the king's veins. In the 
classical mysteries thronismos, the ritual of sitting perfectly still on 
a throne was so important as to present close ties with initiation 

9Q 

and with identification with the god. In yoga, too, these ideas can 
be found, both as a gesture of the body, expressing an inner mean- 
ing, and as a higher meaning that animates and magically supports 
a gesture of the body. 

This applies also to some aspects of mudras, in which case the 
term gesture has a more specific meaning, since the term mudra may 
also designate an action, a particular operation, that is considered 
in its unity and always in terms of a "seal." 



92 



VII 

THE VIRGIN: 
RELEASE FROM BONDAGE 



In Tantrism the practice of yoga in the strict sense of the word is 
competence of the divya type. Dhyana-yoga treatises are used to 
combine disciplines fostering meditation and concentration with 
some rules of life. The latter should not be understood according to 
the Western sense of moral laws. Their actual purpose is to avert 
any factors that may trouble or upset the soul and distract it from 
practice. The articulations of classical yoga, despite their mental or 
intellectual character, are not abstract and impractical disciplines. 
Unification of the mind requires unification of the soul; it cannot be 
achieved unless the soul is calm and trouble free. Such is the 
practical goal of a life-style that by a superficial observer may be 
considered to conform to moral rules. Classical yoga celebrates the 
brahmacharya state, consisting in sexual abstinence, among other 
things, since sex was considered one of the soul's main upsetting 
factors. 

Very different is the orientation of the intermediate level of the 
viras' and kaulas' orders, since they are endowed with a rajas 
nature, inclined to action. The vira is given to the practice of icchas- 
huddhi, a discipline promoting purification of the will. A pure will 
is a naked, transcendent will, capable of self-determination, which 
is beyond all antithetical values and all pairs of opposites. The 

93 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

ethics followed by viras and kaulas consists in the breaking and the 
overcoming of the bonds (pasha) characterizing the inferior, worldly 
person (pashu). A double symbolism has been associated to the 
corresponding task. 

The first symbol is that of the mythological god Heruka, "who 
is without clothes" (this is also one of Shiva's characteristics). 1 The 
second symbol is that of the virgin (kumari), of Shakti as Uma, "no 
one's bride." It is said, "The power of the will is Uma, the Virgin." 
The vira must have the virgin; he has to forcibly strip her of all her 
clothes and rape her on her throne, which means he has to take 
possession of and to incorporate the elementary nature of power. 
But in order to be able to do this he must walk on a long, rugged 
path. The following are details on how that is accomplished. The 
Tantras contain several lists of pasha from which the vira must free 
himself in the course of his journey. I will outline the main pasha 
listed in the Kularvana-Tantra (X, 90) and add some clarifications. 



SYMPATHY (DAY A) 

Daya is the inclination to allow oneself to be moved and troubled 
by other people's sufferings and misfortunes. As "compassion for 
all living things" (in the West this virtue goes under the name 
"humanitarianism"), which in other Hindu spiritualities was con- 
sidered a positive and meritorious attitude, daya is considered in 
Tantrism to be a bond (pasha). By so doing, the Tantras do not 
mean to idealize spiritual callousness and insensitive selfishness. 
To begin with, no mercy should be shown toward one's own self 
(enough for the charge of selfishness). Also, we are dealing here 
with a discipline that is obviously not meant for people given to 
mawkish sentimentality. In some cases emancipation requires a 
certain degree of harshness or relentlessness. After all, daya should 
not be equated with karuna, which is proper to a different plane and 
to the body of preliminary disciplines examined in this context. In 
fact, the ultimate, positive overcoming of the bond of individuality 
necessarily involves an openness that allows one to be in tune with 
other beings, but in a way that is free from sentimental perturba- 
tions, that is, at a superpersonal, objective level. 



DELUSION (MOHA) 

The pasha of delusion derives from a life-style that is inconsistent, 
without a center, and constantly gravitating around external factors 
to which the empirical subject draws its sense of identity: hence 

94 



The Virgin: Release from Bondage 
hope and its counterpart, delusion, which take place when one's 
hopes and goals are not fulfilled, and when one's expectations are 
not met. The vira rescinds this bond and purifies his will, since 
external circumstances do not dishearten him but always find him 
active and invulnerable. Obviously, this rescindment requires a 
flexible and agile will, if one is to let go and to subsequently keep 
going, without dwelling on negative factors and thus allowing 
them to break one's spirit. In a wider context than a mere strength- 
ening of the will, besides the capability of accepting all things as 
unavoidable, it is a matter of understanding. It is taught that delu- 
sions, adversities, personal tragedies and failures, even catastro- 
phes may play the role of a hidden guru, of a spiritual teacher sui 
generis; they may be interpreted as signs to discern the right path. 

SHAME AND SIN (LAJJA) 

The vira does not take other people's criticisms into consideration. 
The positive and negative comments about him made by the society 
in which he lives do not affect him. He is beyond shame and honor. 
He does not accept judgment according to the standards of ordi- 
nary society, but he does not hesitate to subject himself to the 
criticisms of an authoritative guru of the order to which he belongs. 
It is improper to speak of "sin" in this context. The notion of sin, as 
it has been understood by the Judeo-Christian tradition, is not 
found in Asia nor in the Aryan world, in either its Eastern or 
Western hemispheres. The latter knows the concept of "fault" rather 
than "sin," in the sense of contamination, or impurity (an impurity 
that is almost physical, as in ancient Greece). When sin is reduced 
to the notion of guilt, it does not have a moral connotation, but it 
rather denotes a wrong action, performed in an irrational frame of 
mind. Earlier we learned that according to the Hindu doctrine of 
karma, he who violates his own dharma does not become a "sin- 
ner" but rather endures the consequences of his own actions. In this 
context, the pasha to be overcome could be identified with a "guilty 
conscience." The vira's will is purified, since he does not allow 
thoughts of guilt to torment him. He takes responsibility for his 
wrongdoing without apologizing. He leaves his faults behind, ani- 
mated by a renewed and stronger determination to err no more. 



FEAR (BHAYA) 

Tantrism attributes particular value to this bond and to its over- 
coming. More than any other it characterizes ordinary humans 

95 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

(pashus); likewise its absence characterizes true viras. This is not an 
ordinary physical and animal-like fear, but rather a kind of fear that 
arises from deep levels within one's being, and which may manifest 
itself in supernatural experiences. In Appendix One of this book we 
shall learn how, in the after-death experiences described in the 
Bardo Thodol, fear may preclude the achievement of liberation by 
preventing a person from identifying with terrifying and over- 
whelming forces. Thus in some ancient Western and Indian rites, 
special ordeals were prepared for the apprentice. In order to com- 
plete them successfully one needed to conquer fear and disgust and 
to demonstrate spiritual courage. During these trials ceremonial 
and magical means were employed. We may presume that Tantrism, 
with a similar intent, sometimes employed magical practices that 
originally had a black-magic ring to them. Such, for instance, is the 
practice of shavasana ("dead posture"). He who practices sadhana is 
supposed to go at night to a deserted house, a mountaintop, or a 
cemetery. There he must sit astride a corpse that has been laid on 
its belly, facing north. He must draw on the corpse's back a graphic 
symbol (yantra), usually an inverted triangle, representing Shakti. 
At this point he evokes elementary forces by reciting mantras and 
by projecting prana in the corpse with the purpose of animating it 
(pranapratishtha) and of producing a temporary incarnation of the 
evoked force. If the rite is successful, this force actually manifests 
itself in the corpse, whose head will then spin around and speak to 
the apprentice. The apprentice must be able to impose his will right 
away on the "ghost." This practice is considered terrifying and 
most dangerous. It is by far the gloomiest practice mentioned in the 
Tantras, and it is influenced by the demonic substratum of aborigi- 
nal populations. 4 



DISGUST (GHRINA) 

According to a Tantric text, "All the means employed must be 
experienced without disgust, concupiscence, or attachment." 5 



FAMILY, KINSHIP, CLAN (KULA) 

Kinship ties are bonds of a natural and affective type, most cher- 
ished by what in Western countries may be called a bourgeois life- 
style. Because of what has been said so far, it is difficult to picture 
a vira as a parent, a spouse, or an obedient child. In his own way 
he is a bona fide ascetic, no less than a sannyasin, who, according 
to the traditional Hindu doctrine of the four ashramas, is a person 

96 



The Virgin: Release from Bondage 

who has become free from family and caste-related duties. The 
Tantric apprentice's detachment is rather an inner event. 

CASTE (VARNA) 

According to Indo-Aryan tradition, a caste corresponds to an indi- 
vidual differentiated nature, and to the body of laws (dharma) one 
should follow. In the Left-Hand Path, however, dharma is seen as 
a limitation, or as a conditioning to be overcome. Purification of the 
will requires that no given existential situation, legacy, personal 
relationship, or inner law should become a bond. Attivarna, the 
suppression of various caste-system prerogatives (suppression from 
above and not from below, as it is advocated by "champions" of 
human rights or by liberal democrats), was likewise an ascetic's 
privilege. Despite the situation characteristic of the last age, Kali 
Yuga, which is one marked by dissolution, Tantrism does not ac- 
cept any caste limitations. It shares the early Buddhist perspective 
according to which one who is picking firewood does not care from 
what tree it came. Likewise, it does not matter to what caste a 
person pursuing absolute liberation belongs. Obviously, this is a 
case of apparent "democracy." The capability of effectively walking 
on the path produces differentiations among people that are more 
clean-cut and real than the ones due to caste membership, espe- 
cially when the latter have lost their original and legitimate foun- 
dation. 



PRECEPTS, RITES, VARIOUS OBSERVANCES AND INTER- 
DICTIONS (SILA) 

Sila are the bonds of morality and of social conformity. Anti- 
nomianism and the release of the will from all laws are in Tantrism 
carried to their utmost consequences, to the point where "one 
should feel able to commit incest with one's mother and sister." 
When it comes to sayings like that, however, it should not be 
forgotten that we are dealing with a formulation of the highly 
symbolic, multifaceted language that we shall encounter in later 
chapters. As in the case of "philosophical incest," which is advo- 
cated by the Western Hermetic-alchemical tradition, we may refer 
to an esoteric interpretation that plays down such alarming pre- 
cepts. The "mother" one should feel free to possess is Parashakti, 
the primordial force from which everything originates; she is por- 
trayed as the Mother or as the Virgin. When instead of Parashakti 
we consider the female Shakti, Shiva's counterpart, we must con- 

97 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

elude that the two are "brother and sister," since they are generated 
from the same source point (Parashakti). Thus their sexual union - 
a fundamental principle of Tantrism - is actually an act of incest. 
Such a symbolic interpretation, however, is still too theoretical in 
the context of the purification of the will. It was shunned, for 
instance, by the Aghori sect, which in the course of the sexual 
rituals celebrated in Durga's honor purposely practiced incest. Sym- 
bolic interpretations were also rejected by those Tantric chakras 
(initiatory chains) who believed that it should not matter if the 
woman to be employed in maithuna happened to be a sister or a 
daughter. 

The essence of pashaniroda, the release from bondage, is the 
achievement of an inner state in which the vira feels that there is 
nothing he is not able to do, 6 since icchashuddhi, the complete puri- 
fication of the will, the possession of the Virgin, has led him beyond 
every antithesis, into neutral ground. He will feel "equally in re- 
gard to himself, friends and foes; pleasure and pain; heaven and 
hell; good and evil; contempt and praise; day and night; poverty 
and wealth; a prostitute and his own mother; wife and daughter; 
reality and dreams; what is perennial and what is ephemeral." 

Once the pasha have been cut, the vira becomes avredhuta, one 
who is washed from all dirt. He is "naked," like the divine arche- 
type represented by the Egyptian god Heruka. 

Quite frankly, the suspicion may arise that these are nothing 
but phony cover-ups and empty words, and that what is falsely 
believed to be liberation or purification in reality is the removal of 
obstacles preventing one from unleashing his animal instincts with 
no restraints whatsoever. We cannot rule this out, but again I must 
remind the readers of the saying "A sharpened edge of a razor, a 
difficult path is this!" At this point some considerations are in 
order. First of all we must presuppose a thorough examination of 
one's motives and inclinations, whether this work is carried out by 
the individual or by a guru. For instance, if one finds himself to be 
hard-hearted, the discipline that will successfully help him to achieve 
a neutral state and a naked will is not the destruction of the daya 
(sympathy) bond - since its destruction will strengthen that dispo- 
sition - but rather the contrary. Likewise, if one admits to a hidden 
attraction toward a young and beautiful sister, incest will not help 
him to wrest the will from sila's bonds and to overcome them. 

Second, the removal of pashas should not be considered apart 
from a larger context including other disciplines. Here, cheating 
oneself is next to impossible. One of the disciplines is obedience. It 



98 



The Virgin: Release from Bondage 

is not a coincidence that the viras' doctrine, which views the adept 
as svecchakari ("he who does as he pleases"), teaches that the dis- 
ciple must surrender himself as an inanimate object to his spiritual 
teacher and obey his orders without questioning whether they are 
reasonable, fair, or humane. 8 There are many stories about endless, 
inexorable, and exasperating trials to which various disciples sub- 
mitted themselves, following the instructions of their teachers. To- 
day the house that Milarepa had to build, destroy, and rebuild for 
endless years is still standing. The meaning of all this is the follow- 
ing. To comply perfectly with someone else's will, without recrimi- 
nating or beating about the bush, is a good way to shape the will 
of an insufficiently strong individual, and to make it capable of 
absolute self-determination outside the binding tendencies and in- 
clinations due to karmic or regular conduct. The ultimate purpose 
is not to give up one's will, but to purify it, to increase its powers, 
and to individualize it, thus making it absolute and truly autono- 
mous. 

A parallel may be drawn with the ancient Islamic order of the 
Ishmaelites. This order comprised an initiatic hierarchy of seven 
levels. In the higher levels the guiding principle was analogous to 
the Tantric viras' and kaulas' principle, "nothing exists, everything 
is permitted." In order to be admitted to the higher levels, candi- 
dates were first required to go through the lower levels, in which 
unconditional obedience was the norm. This obedience was so 
radical that in some cases it required giving up one's life without 
any valid reason if the supreme leader of the order so commanded. 
A similar episode occurred when its leader, Sheik al-Gabir, met 
with the count of Champagne during the Crusades. 

It is clear by now that the release from bondage is not a matter 
of removing, with the excuse of pursuing initiatory practices, those 
obstacles preventing one from unleashing one's samsaric nature. 
This does not affect what I have expounded about the purification 
of passions through passions themselves. That is a different issue 
altogether. 

That impulses arising from the deepest recesses of one's being 
are kept under control is attested to by the special attention turned 
to the so-called karmic body. This body corresponds to all the 
elements, under the form of samskaras, assumed by an individual 
from prenatal samsaric currents. The presupposition for this body's 
absolute purification consists in separating the will from such a 
body and in making the will autonomous from it. 

I would like at this point to refer to something other than yogic 



99 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

procedures. There is a practice that is employed by Buddhist 
Tantrism in pursuit of the same goal. It is difficult to take this 
practice out of its socio-geographical context. 

This practice is called chod, a Tibetan word that means "to cut 
off," and more specifically, to cut the bond represented by the 
karmic body. It takes place in the context of ceremonial magic, with 
the participation of dark, demonic factors. The inner strength re- 
quired to go through it is also designated as the "indomitable 
courage." Committed to the goal of getting rid of all hopes and 
fears, the person undergoing the ritual evokes, with the aid of 
magic, various elemental forces, ordering them to devour his no- 
longer-needed samsaric body, so that the samsaric I may be re- 
leased, the debt paid, and the conditioning overcome. What is left 
is the I's nucleus and sheer power. Following the magical phase of 
the sacrifice, to which the ritual imparts a dramatic and terrifying 
overtone, what follows is the knowledge of the void, bringing to an 
end the consumption of the samsaric-karmic legacy. In the course 
of it, one realizes that the idea of sacrifice is a bond caused by 
ignorance, since there is nothing to be abandoned and nobody to 
give things back to, because nothing really exists as other. 9 It is said 
that the ritualistic-sacrificial evocation of chod may sometimes be 
substituted by purely inner operations of high contemplation. On 
the one hand, the norm is that one who has begun such rituals must 
go through them without help. On the other hand, constant men- 
tion is made of the triple danger intrinsic in these magical-ritualistic 
practices: illness, derangement, and even death. 

When icchashuddhi, the purification of the will, is pursued in 
any of the ways so far described, which are typical of initiatory 
Left-Hand Tantric practices, a critical level is reached. At this level 10 
one is practically deprived of all ordinary, everyday motivations, 
thus becoming "paralyzed" and without support. This level, how- 
ever, is a crucial one. It can be overcome only by employing a self- 
determined strength and by being endowed with the pure, 
unblemished principle of the Virgin, represented by control over 
maya-shakti, which is the centrifugal energy of desire and of samsara. 
A reference is made to the passage of the Bhagavad-Gita in which 
Krishna proposes himself as an example to Arjuna; even though the 
process of creation is completed in him, he still acts by dominating 
his own nature. Thus the vira may consider himself sui securus 
("certain about himself); he may be certain of his invulnerability 
when pursuing any experience recommended by the Tantric Way. 



100 



VIII 

THE EVOCATIONS: 
THE NAMES OF POWER 



While popular forms of Tantrism indulged in the devotional cult 
(shakti-puja) and in the worship (shakti-upasana) of the goddess Shakti, 
higher forms of Tantrism practiced instead the contemplation of 
Shakti ( shakti- dhy ana). Shakti- dhy ana consists of two phases, which 
are influenced by two sayings derived from the Upanishadic tradi- 
tion by replacing brahman with Shakti: "Everything is Shakti," and 
"I am this Shakti." 

The first phase of the contemplation of Shakti deals with the 
interiorization and the realization of the Shaktic worldview, which 
I have already expounded. This phase is characterized not by mere 
speculation but by the attempt to lead the apprentice to an experi- 
ence of the objective dimension of reality. This experience can be 
defined as a magical-symbolic perception of the world, which al- 
lows the individual to live and to act in a nature, a light, a space 
and time, and a series of causes and effects that are qualitatively 
different from those that characterize the natural environment in- 
habited by contemporary humanity. In the course of history a 
modification has taken place concerning not only the forms of 
subjective thought but also the fundamental categories of objective 



101 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

experience. We may say that maya's veil has become increasingly 
thicker and that the hiatus between I and not-I has widened consid- 
erably. The two main consequences of this process are the percep- 
tion of the universe in terms of pure outwardness and the removal 
of the existential foundation of the previous living and sacred 
worldview. Modern science has built its theories on this lifeless and 
superficial exteriority. 

Shakti-dhyana's goal is to retrieve the primordial living percep- 
tion of the world. The first phase of dhyana is based on the prin- 
ciple of correspondence; every phenomenon, thing, or state is asso- 
ciated with an immaterial power, with a being, or with a deity 
(devata). 1 The second phase is based on the principle of identity: 
"Not only do these phenomena, things, or states of being corre- 
spond to these powers; they are these very powers." In the course 
of sadhana the combined action of sadhana's various aspects is 
supposed to lead the apprentice from the first phase, which consists 
of the foreboding of supersensible presences, to some sort of psy- 
chic perception (ritambhara). This perception is gradually stripped 
of external elements and processes until it reaches a final stage, in 
which formless "roots" (hence the term "emptiness," shunya or 
shunyata), corresponding to essences, are eventually perceived. 

Evocative procedures of a ceremonial and theurgic type, which 
were well known in the ancient Western world as well, may facili- 
tate the disclosure of the silent outwardness of reality by breaking 
through it and acting in a violent and dramatic way, even though 
the effects may be short-lived. Dhyana, which may develop into a 
true samyama, is based on an aspect of nature that is often associ- 
ated with a graphic symbol (yantra, mandala), or with a formula 
(mantra), or with a mudra, or with a deity (devata). Yantras and 
mandalas, as I have said, are not abstract and general symbols, but 
rather the signaturae rerum. They are related to the forms that are 
assumed by various powers on a subtle or causal plane; in other 
words, they facilitate the perception of the living meanings and of 
the forces underlying the phenomena, processes, or appearances 
found in nature. I have also indicated that the term seal (mudra). 
may be referred to the ritual postures assumed by various divini- 
ties. These postures have a "form [gestalt] of the gesture," which, 
once it has been understood, is believed to have an enlightening 
and revelatory power. 

We thus arrive at the varieties of shakti-dhyana, whose object is 
the image of a deity (devata, shakti, dakini, etc.), which may be the 
same found in traditional cults. Here the magical power of the 



102 



The Evocations: The Names of Power 

imagination plays an even greater role than in other practices. In 
Tantrism there are complex procedures that include, in the case of 
some Tibetan schools, the so-called creation of the gods. Hindu 
Tantrism, when its object is a material image (a painting or a 
statue), pursues the pranic animation of this image. The devata, or 
Shakti, or dakini, is "evoked" by means of the "body," which con- 
sists in a vivified mental image projected into it. The act that 
sanctions the "real presence" (avahana) comes after the dismissal of 
the evoked force (visarjana). 3 The reference to prana implies that the 
evocation requires mental and psychic intermediaries, since a force 
in the subtle plane cannot directly manifest itself into something 
material. The practice of magical-fluid animation of various images 
can also be found in other traditions, especially in the Egyptian 
tradition. 4 

In yoga the vivification and transformation of prana sometimes 
take place through subtle energies that emanate from the yogin. 
This happens during the state of his absolute, prolonged bodily 
stillness, as he focuses with his mind on this image. In some cir- 
cumstances, however, some techniques inducing excitement are 
employed, such as an orgasm, obtained in an adequately super- 
vised sexual union. In other cases, the image is charged through a 
collective ritual performed in a Tantric circle. 

In Tibetan Buddhism the essential instrument employed dur- 
ing practice is vajra-chitta, the unchangeable mind, which gradually 
feeds the fire of the imagination. A distinction should be made 
betw ttn jnani-devata and bhakt a- devata. The former corresponds to a 
mental image; the latter to an image produced by an ecstatic rap- 
ture and known on a religious plane as "adoration." This is the 
basis on which the god is "created." Also, the texts say that the 
devatas created by the mind are as real as living devatas. That claim 
must be understood in the following sense: by virtue of the prin- 
ciple of analogy, the visualization and animation processes are 
confused with the process of a real, objective evocation. Thus, 
because of the similarity between the two, the created image at- 
tracts a power that transforms it into the body of its own temporary 
manifestation. 

This is the first, "creative" or "speculative," phase of the pro- 
cess. The second phase corresponds to the practical goals pursued 
during practice. All things considered, the real goal is the experi- 
ence of power, by virtue of which one is able to overcome the world 
of external phenomena. The act of evoking and then dismissing a 
devata or a shakti corresponds to the emerging and to the subse- 



103 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

quent dimming of such an enlightening experience. Thus, during 
the second phase of the contemplative process, one aims at elimi- 
nating any duality and at identifying with the deity that has been 
evoked. Usually the method employed consists in going from the 
image of the bhakti-devata to its mantra; from the mantra to bija; 
from bija to "emptiness" (shunya, the dimension of transcendence) 
and then to vajra, where the devata produces a purely spiritual 
experience. In kundalini yoga and in Vajrayana's yoga these "iden- 
tifications" take place within the body's secret centers (chakras); in 
the chakras, the devatas, the shaktis, and dhyani-buddhas (buddhas 
who personify in their gestures - mudras - the various phases of 
the realization process) are known according to their true nature. 
At a given moment, the various parts of sadhana condition and 
integrate one another. 

This does not prevent the principle of identification from char- 
acterizing a phase of shakti-dhyana during a peculiar Tantric ritual. 
The bottom line of this ritual consists in the evocation of a devata or 
of a Shakti, and in actualizing their real presence in the form of a 
material image. This material image is eventually identified with 
one's body. The procedure is the same: a divine image is evoked, 
fixed, and roused in a specific mudra (a magical-symbolic gesture 
that expresses its essence) and in its traditional and esoteric at- 
tributes. After that, the apprentice imagines his own body and his 
person to be the deity's. In Tibetan Tantrism this is but a prelimi- 
nary ritual, which is also used in yoga as a prelude to spiritual 
actions. A text provides some further details. 

The basic image is that of the vajra-yogini, the naked Virgin. She 
is a goddess made of vajra, whose body is bright red and whose 
attributes are more or less the same as Kali's. The apprentice iden- 
tifies with her and imagines her body to be the size of his own 
body. In the course of the visualization process, he expands this 
shining figure with his mind and imagines her to be as big as a 
house, then as big as a hill, then as vast as the universe. Then, in 
reverse, he imagines her smaller and smaller, until she is reduced 
to the size of a seed, still having all the limbs and parts sharply 
defined. In both cases he is supposed to visualize every single 
detail. This rhythm of expansion and contraction is somehow re- 
lated to the practice of reabsorption of the cosmic prana, more on 
which later. If such a practice is the prelude to yogic actions, the 
goddess's shape should be visualized as being shining and inter- 
nally vacuous, almost as if it consisted of a mere transparent and 
luminous membrane. Likewise, the inside of one's body is per- 



104 



The Evocations: The Names of Power 

ceived as empty; within this formless space the magical visualiza- 
tions are supposed to take place. These visualizations, in turn, act 
on different pranic currents and generate various degrees of en- 
lightenment. 5 Such practices, if followed thoroughly, are not ex- 
empt from dangers, since they could induce various forms of frenzy. 
As I have said, beyond the various powers, divinities, and 
shaktis underlying phenomena and things, one should gradually 
come to realize the fundamental unity of all these energies, accord- 
ing to the first of the two Upanishadic sayings: "Truly, all of this is 
Shakti." Contemplation, thereafter, gives way to the phase of iden- 
tification: "Between this Shakti and me there is no difference what- 
soever," "I am nothing but Shakti herself." Such is the leitmotif of 
the Tantric cult at the contemplative level. Naturally, this may 
merely represent a preliminary state of mind. One text says: 

I am Her [Shakti]: this idea will eventually lead one to be trans- 
formed into Her Let the apprentice do everything, from early 

in the morning to late at night, with the awareness of the devata's 
immanent presence. Such a habit will develop a divine frame of 
mind through which the apprentice will achieve various siddhis. 
Only he who has acquired such a frame of mind will become a 
Siddha. . . . The theme of contemplation is that nothing in the 
world exists outside of Her; the mass of her spirit, her fire, and 
her radiating energy (tejas) fills the universe. The apprentice who 
acquires this awareness will move freely like a god while remain- 
ing on earth. Despite having a human body, in truth he is not a 
man, but a god. . . . There is nothing that he ought to worship. 
He deserves people's worship, but nobody deserves his. 6 

Another Tantric practice is the so-called nyasa, which is a pre- 
liminary stage of what in Vajrayana constitutes the arousal of the 
vajra-rupa. The term nyasa comes from the verb "to put." It is a 
process of invocation of real presences, whose object no longer is 
the body as a whole, but individual parts, spots, and organs, ac- 
cording to the Tantric principle: "The body is the temple of the 
deity, and the living being is Sadashiva himself." Through nyasa 
one induces or awakens various deities and shaktis in various parts 
of the body, especially in the so-called vital points. The texts distin- 
guish several nyasas. Kara-nyasa consists in touching the fingers in 
order to make the hand "come to life"; anga-nyasa focuses on the 
main members of the body, commencing from the heart and ending 
with the hands. From another point of view, there are internal 



105 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

creative or "dissolving" nyasas, each endowed with more articula- 
tions. Beyond such a distinction, this process too has a ritual and a 
samyama aspect, the latter being a contemplative realization based 
on mantra. Sometimes they are expressed in sayings like this: "AM 

Q 

[the mantra] and the life [prana] of the god X are present here." In 
this, as well as in other cases, the degree of the ritual action's 
effectiveness is directly proportional not only to the spiritual and 
initiatic levels reached by the apprentice but also to his dignity and 
to his consecrating virtue, of which he must be aware and in which 
he must have an unwavering faith. During nyasa this action consists 
in putting the hand on or in pointing the finger at different parts of 
the body, while pronouncing a mantra and simultaneously realiz- 
ing, through the mind, the real presence of various devatas. If the 
hand has been "made alive" by a shakti, the part that has been 
touched will come to life: divine life will flow into it. Then the 
material organ, made of vajra and the sattva guna, would begin to 
awaken. Following individual isolated impositions in the course of 
the ritual, the hand is moved over the entire body as if to rub over 
its surface the divine fluid; finally, a transformation of the human 
figure is imagined or visualized. A dark man ridden with guilt is 
burned in the spiritual fire, and his place is taken by a new body 
made of light, which is exalted and rendered subtle by the "nectar 
of joy," which springs forth from the divine couple's intercourse. 
This new body is also thought to be made of mantra, which is to 
say, of vajra. These teachings have a counterpart in magical Western 
traditions. I again quote Agrippa, who, in a chapter of his De occulta 
philosophia aptly entitled "Of the members of God, and of their 
influence on our human members," wrote: "If a man capable of the 
divine influence do make any member of his body clean and free 
from filthiness, then it becomes the habitale and proper seat of the 
secret limb of God, and of the virtue to which the same name is 
ascribed." 9 

Agrippa goes on to say: "These are the great and hidden mys- 
teries concerning which it is not lawful to publish more." A more 
direct reference, which characterizes the ultimate goal of the proce- 
dure, is found in the hieratic-initiatory tradition of ancient Egypt; 
various practices attempted to make all the body's organs "talk"; 
this, obviously, is the equivalent to the arousal of ecstatic and 
magical states. 

Usually nyasa is associated to another practice (bhutashuddhi), 
or the purification of the elements and of matter, which constitutes 
nyasa's premise. This practice has a purely inner character, and it 



106 



The Evocations: The Names of Power 

somehow prefigures what will take place in the course of yoga in 
its laya aspect. Its basis consists in imagining the series of subtle 
centers located along the axis of the spinal cord. The lowest of these 
centers corresponds to the earth, while the others refer to the re- 
maining elements and to the higher tattvas, all the way to parasamvid, 
which is located on the top of the head. I will discuss these centers 
at greater length in Chapter X. Bhutashuddi consists in the mental 
realization of each element's dissolution and transformation into a 
hierarchically higher element, which in turn is considered subtler 
and purer. This is achieved by shifting the mental fire of the visu- 
alization process from one center to the next. 10 If the inner sensitiv- 
ity is sharpened, the effect will be similar to a circuit's breakdown 
into a series of states, or degrees of power, until it reaches a certain 
level of saturation and vibratility. This level facilitates the following 
operation, consisting in imposition through the nyasa. I said that 
bhutashuddi is a prefiguration because, allegedly, the process of the 
ascending reabsorption of the elements is real only at the level of 
kundalini yoga. The same goes for the bodily organs' "divinization" 
through nyasa. 

The following details about bhutashuddi are found in the 
Mahanirvana-Tantra. The earth is dissolved into water; water into 
fire; fire into air; air into ether. This takes place as each of the senses 
of the body is dissolved into another, in the following order: touch, 
smell, taste, sight, and hearing; hearing is dissolved into ahamkara- 
tattva; the latter into buddhi; buddhi into prakriti (that is, into 
Shakti); prakriti into brahman. One must then proceed to imagine a 
dark man, situated in the left side of the abdominal cavity, as a 
sinful body. The following stages of this practice include pranayama, 
the correct way of breathing. One must inhale sixteen times from 
the left nostril, while evoking YAM, the air's mantra. One must 
visualize it as engulfed in smoke and think that, in this fashion, the 
dark man's substance will dry up. While retaining breath for sixty- 
four repetitions of RAM (the fire's mantra, which is situated in the 
chakra at the level of the navel), one must imagine that this act is 
bringing about the destruction of the dark man's substance. Finally, 
during an exhalation lasting thirty-two times, one must evoke the 
white varna-bija, the "heavenly waters" mantra, which is situated in 
the forehead. One must imagine the pouring out of a fluid from the 
burned-up dark body, which generates a new divine body. Such a 
body will be consolidated by visualizing LAM, the earth's yellow 
mantra, which is located in the muladhar a- chakra, and by staring at 
it calmly and firmly. What follows is nyasa. It "infuses into this new 



107 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

body the life of the Devi" and it makes a macrocosm out of the 
apprentice's body. 11 The formula SA'HAM ("I am her") seals the 
double ritual. 

I have frequently mentioned the word mantra. At this time it is 
appropriate to provide some further details. Mantra may designate 
a simple liturgical formula, an invocation, or a prayer. If by the 
term we designate a formula or a magical syllable, then the employ- 
ment of mantras dates back to the Vedic period (specific references 
to mantras are found in the Atharva-Veda). It plays such a major 
role in Tantrism that some have called it the Mantrayana, the "Path 
of the Mantra." The most interesting aspect is the metaphysical 
development (especially in the Northern school) of the doctrine of 
the mantras, which can be connected with the doctrine of the 
tattvas. A wide development and a peculiar articulation was also 
given to the theory or theology of what in some ancient philoso- 
phies, and even in Alexandrian Christianity, was called logos (verbum, 
or the Word). In Tantric Buddhism the science of mantras corre- 
sponds to the second esoteric mystery (guhya), namely, to the trans- 
formation of the word into a vajra nature, or, to put it in other 
words, to the awakening of the "living word" made of power. 
Following the analogous awakening of the "living thought" and of 
the magical imagination (the first guhya), the third and final guhya 
consists in the arousal of the same vajra (diamond-thunderbolt) 
quality in the body. 

The background theory may be summarized in the following 
way. Shakti and her manifestation are conceived as a sound or as 
a verb (shabda, vak); even the various phases of the cosmic develop- 
ment are also interpreted accordingly. The differentiation between 
Shiva and Shakti corresponds to the differentiation between the 
expression or expressive sound (shabda) and the meaning or object 
intended (artha). We may recall here the triple order of tattvas 
(pure, semipure, and impure) and its relationship with the "three 
worlds," with the three bodies (causal, subtle, and material), and 
with the three stages of atman. At the level of the first of the three 
orders, gemination has not yet reached a level whereby the "other" 
acquires an outward character. Therefore artha is not an object, but 
a pure meaning, or better, an object in the form of a meaning, as is 
the case of the process of forming human ideas. Something simple, 
endowed with a nature of pure light, puts the terms shabda and 
artha on the plane of ishvara-tattva, in the state where prajna and 
atman are conceived as pure affirmation (anujna). At the level of the 
semipure tattvas the differentiation and articulation processes be- 



108 



The Evocations: The Names of Power 

gin to unfold. Also, the whole comprising the "letters," "syllables," 
or "sounds," which are included in the ineffable unity of the meta- 
physical "great dot" (parabindu), unfolds in distinct forms (the texts 
say that the "dot" eventually bursts open). These are the "subtle 
letters" or "causal letters," which correspond to the devatas and to 
the shaktis, namely, to the various powers of a natura naturans; they 
are called "little mothers" (matrikas), "seeds," and "roots" (bijas). A 
relationship could be established between the subtle letters and 
what Greek metaphysics called logoi spermatikoi, the Kabbala called 
"letters of light," and medieval magical speculation called claviculae. 
These do not exist in a material dimension; the "sounds" that are 
here being discussed cannot be heard; they are occult sounds 
(avyaktarva-nada), ways and "agglomerates" of immaterial power, 
artha's correlations being "lightning," or forms of light. The uni- 
verse and every being are made of these sounds and letters. In 
Hindu doctrine, ether (akasha) is considered the substratum of ev- 
ery phenomenon. On the one hand, ether (which has nothing in 
common with the ether described by modern physics) is believed to 
be alive ("made of life," or of prana); on the other hand, its sub- 
stance is believed to be "sound" or "word." The "seat" that corre- 
sponds to the doctrine of the three states is tajasa, which is blocked 
by sleep to ordinary man's consciousness. 

Let us now deal with the plane of impure tattvas, which corre- 
sponds to the waking state and to the material world. The law of 
this world consists in an other being formed out of an I; this marks 
the passage from objectivity to subjectivity. Such a division is also 
found in the realm of words: on the one hand, there are shabda and 
artha, the name- voice, or the spoken language; on the other hand, 
there is the object signified (rupa) by the voice, which is external to 
it. We are now on the plane of contingent and particular beings. 
First of all, the relationship between word and object is no longer 
direct, but is now mediated, discursive, and conventional. The 
name no longer evokes an eternal meaning through an illumina- 
tion, but evokes a mere material image, which is corruptible and 
perceived by the senses. The voice is now a material voice 
(sthulashabda). Secondly, through the power of kankukas, the con- 
tents of experience are nothing but the phenomena found in space 
and time. These phenomena are perceived by a finite conscious- 
ness, yet they depend on it for their manifestation. Even the name 
is now differentiated according to the multiplicity of languages. For 
instance, the word for fire in Sanskrit is agni, in Tibetan me, in Latin 
ignis, in German feuer. All these names evoke, not fire as such, but 



109 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

various representations of fire. Therefore, the so-called nominalist 
theory claims that the "universals" (general concepts) are nothing 
but mere verbal abstractions, lacking in content, since there is no 
such thing as "fire," but only this or that fire, which is perceived by 
the senses. 

With this theory in the background, the mantras aim at restor- 
ing the word to a state in which the name no longer evokes the 
image of an object, but rather its power (shakti). In this state, the 
word no longer represents a noise produced by a certain indi- 
vidual, but rather represents the voice of the thing itself, as it 
reverberates outside the reach of human ears in the form of a 
cosmic language, or "language of the gods." After all, several tra- 
ditions bear witness to the idea of a universal and essential lan- 
guage, in which everything has its natural, original, and eternal 
name, made of sacred and divine letters. According to Agrippa, 

these letters "are similar among all people, no matter what Ian- 

i ^ 

guage they speak." A reference to this phenomenon is found in 
the biblical myth of the tower of Babel and in the ensuing confusion 
of the languages. A mantra is, therefore, a word restored to its 
pristine state. 

The faculties attributed to the mantras derive from the organic 
worldview of this doctrine, according to which the finite, material, 
and physical world is only a manifestation of the subtle, super- 
sensuous, and transcendent world. It has been suggested that the 
tattvas do not dissolve into each other, but that they subsist simul- 
taneously on their own planes - in the same way that the inner and 
outer aspects of an object coexist and are simultaneous. As in the 
human body all the gods and all the shaktis are present, likewise in 
the human language all the letters and names of the transcendent 
word are present in an occult way: hence a triple correspondence, 
which is at the basis of the doctrine of the mantras. 

In the first place, there is a correspondence between the letters 
and syllables of a human alphabet, and the matrikas ("little moth- 
ers," "letters of light") and the bijas (the "syllables/seeds") of the 
subtle plane, in which the devatas and the shaktis are connected to 
corresponding bijas. Second, there is a certain connection of these 
letters and syllables to parts of the vital, subtle centers of the 
human organism, which are conceived as the seats of these powers, 
and as the creation of the powers manifested in the letters. Third, 
there is a correspondence of the letters with elemental powers of 
things, since the same principles, once the dualistic law of maya- 
shakti becomes operative, are manifested in both man and nature. 



110 



The Evocations: The Names of Power 

As far as practice is concerned, the point of departure is repre- 
sented by the so-called sphota, which is the object of various inter- 
pretations among different Hindu schools of thought. Generally 
speaking, sphota influences the evocative power of every word and 
every name. It is the phenomenon by virtue of which a given word 
(shabda) presents to the mind a specific image or suggests to it a 
specific meaning. In their interpretation of the sphota, the Tantras 
for the most part agree with the views expounded by Mimamsa, a 
Hindu darshana that distinguishes the material sound, produced 
by a vibration and by a clash of two objects - a "generated" and 
temporary sound - from an eternal and immaterial sound. The evoca- 
tive power of a language and of a name derives from the fact that 
the audible material sound is only the form through which the 
other sound is manifested and expressed. The other sound, which 
essentially belongs to the plane of buddhi, is a determined and 
superindividual principle, to be found well beyond the duality of 
inner and outer and beyond the duality of concept (as idea or 
conversational notion) and reality. (This corresponds to the view 
according to which, for instance, in every combustion, a self-subsis- 
tent, uncreated, undifferentiated fire is manifested as a result of 
specific material causes.) Sphota is believed to be possible in refer- 
ence to this plane, in which the voice still has the object in itself. 

This implies that in every act of understanding there is, whether 
potentially or partially, an evocative power that is not confined 
exclusively to the sensory and dualistic order of things. Mantras are 
believed to be the support of such a reintegration. Having been 
handed down by an immemorial wisdom, the mantras are the 
devatas' names and the seminal and shaping forces in both nature 
and in the human body. They are hints of an "absolute language" 
or of a "divine language." 

The Tantric texts are careful to specify that a mantra should not 
be confused with its expression through a material syllable or 
word, whether written or spoken, any more than a god should be 
mistaken for his image carved in wood or in stone. The mantra 
must be "awakened." The mental fire projected on it must consume 
the mantra's materiality and transform it into a subtle form "made 
of light." This is accomplished by inducing, on a higher plane, the 
phenomenon of sphota, or evocation - which suggests an opening or 
a blossoming (the literal meaning of the term sphota is "bursting 
forth"). Before all this, the mantra is "asleep"; it is a mere noise 
without any real powers. An explicit Tantric teaching says that if 
one does not know the meaning or the awakening of a mantra, it 



111 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

remains inoperative, even if it is repeated a million times. The 
knowledge of the devata presiding over a mantra (adhishthatri-devata) 
is associated with the awakening of a mantra (mantra-chaitanya) and 

1 o 

with the power that arouses it. 

The majority of the texts suggest that an indispensable require- 
ment must be fulfilled before one ventures into this world; the 
mantras are not to be learned from books, but should rather be 
communicated orally and personally from a spiritual teacher in 
very specific circumstances. Only then will the disciple be able to 
sense the right direction to follow and to begin to pronounce with 
the "magical mind" (vajra-chitta) the mantra; in this case the mantra 
will be much more than just an unintelligible sound (the vast 
majority of mantras and bijas, unlike what some artificial and overly 
allegorical exegeses of the letters forming a mantra claim, do not 
have any meaning whatsoever, since they are mere sounds). 

That having been said, the most frequently employed tech- 
nique to awaken a mantra is its repetition (japa). This repetition at 
first is only verbal, and its object is the mantra in its dormant, 
coarse form. Later, the mantra is no longer repeated, even though 
its pronunciation lingers on. Eventually the repetition is purely 
mental (manasa-japa). At this level, the mantra is transformed from 
mere sound into an act of the spirit. 

The technique of repetitions, which is found in several tradi- 
tions, is twofold. In the first aspect, it acts as a sort of pratyahara; 
it helps to focus the mind, to dull the outer sensibility, and to 
awaken the inner sensibility through an active hypnosis. The sec- 
ond aspect is a magical one, and it refers to an intrinsic power that 
is attributed to the mantra. This action, to use a Catholic theological 
expression, is to a certain extent ex opere operate. The vibrations add 
up and are reverberated, thus affecting, through the subconscious, 
various forces and subtle centers of the body. The result is a pro- 
gressive saturation that facilitates the mantra's awakening and open- 
ing. According to a Tantric image, japa is like shaking a person who 
is asleep until that person awakens and begins to move. 

Analogously, the doctrine of the mantras may facilitate the 
intuitive comprehension of the relationship between the "three 
worlds" (the three seats, or the triple order of tattvas). Let us think 
of a book written in an unknown foreign language; skimming 
through the pages, we will see only a bunch of characters. We may 
compare this experience to the empirical experience of the material 
and phenomenal world, which common humanity perceives during 
the waking state. Conversely, if we could read or understand this 



112 



The Evocations: The Names of Power 

foreign language, when hearing it, our mind would no longer stop 
at the characters, or at the sounds, but on the contrary would grasp 
its meaning directly and in depth. The first case applies to those 
who experience reality only in terms of physical exteriority; the 
second case applies to those who experience reality either in the 
function of the shaping forces that are at work in the subtle world 
or in the sounds and the corresponding "syllables/roots;" the third 
case applies to the experience of the causal world and of the pure 
tattvas. At this last level, the word is a living word and power. It 
is a word that commands physical reality, since in Hindu doctrine 
the physical vibrations are conceived as the tamasic and automatic 
appearance of subtle vibrations which in turn depend on various 
meanings. The command of those who have reached this supreme 
plane is like a thunderbolt that travels along the entire hierarchy, 
starting from the top until it reaches the vibrations at the very 
bottom, which shape matter. This is the so-called vajra-vak, the 
diamond-thunderbolt of the living word. 

Thus Tantrism examines various dimensions of a word, in 
relation to the doctrines of kundalini and of the aforementioned 
centers in the human body (chakras). The spoken word is seen as 
the last echo or reflection of a deep process. In a text quoted by 
Arthur Avalon we read: "It is said that in the muladhara the 'air' 
(Prana-vayu) first appears. That 'air' acted upon by the effort of a 
person desiring to speak, manifests the all-pervading Sabda- 
Brahman." 4 This is the deepest, unmanifested state of sound. What 
follows is the state of the sound or of the already manifested but 
causal word, which is formless. This state corresponds to the area 
in the body between the chakra of the solar plexus and the chakra 
of the heart. What follows is the manifestation of sound on the 
plane of those forces that are both endowed with form and shaping 
reality. This manifestation corresponds to the area between the 
chakra of the heart and that of the larynx. From the larynx on, 
sounds and words assume an audible, spoken, human form and 
thus become concretely manifested. Usually a jiva recognizes a 
sound only when it reaches that last phase, and he believes that this 
alone is a word, the same way he believes that only the physical 
body is his real body. On the contrary, as the physical body implies 
the subtle and causal bodies, which are its roots, likewise, the 
spoken word implies the subtle, causal, and unmanifested states of 
the word, up to the elementary power (kundalini). Without all this, 
the spoken word itself would not be possible, and more specifically, 
it would have no correspondence with reality, since the correspon- 



113 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

dence between a name and an object, as well as the evocative 
power of the sensible word, would be based on states of sound in 
which the objective (artha) and the subjective (shabda) dimensions 
are encompassed in a wider unity. Otherwise, language would be 
like the muttering of a delirious or crazy person. 

As in the case of the three seats of atma beyond the waking 
state, the deep dimensions of the word elude the consciousness of 
the common person, who pronounces words only through the lar- 
ynx, and who evokes like a ghost, through a word deprived of its 
primordial power, shadows and echoes of names rather than true 
names. Thus the doctrine of mantras represents an organic part in 
the transcendent process of reintegration, which constitutes the 
main goal of Tantric sadhana. 

Like every devata and every natural element, each individual 
has his own name and mantra, an essential and eternal name, 
which corresponds to his supertemporal being and which usually 
has no relation with his first or last name. It is the name of the god 
of which he is the manifestation. That the bestowal of a name, in 
the Catholic ceremony of baptism, acquires the dignity of a sacra- 
ment may constitute a pale reflection or image of an initiatory rite. 
In that rite, the name bestowed was not arbitrary, but somehow 
corresponded to a mantra, to the eternal name of the individual, 
and to one of those names that in Western tradition "are inscribed 
in the stars," or in the Tree of Life. In the East it often happens that 
a spiritual teacher may indicate to this or to that person their own 
names, which are as secret as their mantras. It may happen, how- 
ever, that this name is known only in its dormant form, so that it 
remains unintelligible to its recepient. Sir John Woodroffe, who was 
an Englishman, recalled that somebody had naively gone to him to 
ask him to explain the meaning of the mantra that he had received 
from his guru as his initiatory and secret name several years before. 
This clearly shows us the origin of a superstition that is found 
among some primitive people. They are afraid to reveal their names 
to outsiders because they believe that if somebody learns their 
names, that person may enslave their soul. These represent degen- 
erated reminders and echoes from a very distant past, in which the 
name had the value of a mantra. 

According to the Tantras, the mantra, in its magical use, inte- 
grates sadhana- shakti, which is the power that the apprentice ac- 
quires through given disciplines, being endowed with a divine 
force that is the mantra's shakti. The effectiveness of the magical 
action is the result of the union between these two shaktis. The I, 



114 



The Evocations: The Names of Power 

through the vivified and awakened mantra, comes in contact with 
the "seed" of a given power and unites with it in a way that makes 
the act effective, even on the plane of objective reality. By incorpo- 
rating in a given command the mantra related to the force found in 
any given phenomenon - this is above all an inner act, since the 
verbal expression is only its vehicle - the command is realized in a 
supernatural way, without the condition brought about by the 
habitual physical determinisms. For instance, he who knows the 
mantra of fire, by awakening and pronouncing it, may at will 
produce the manifestation of fire, since he acts with the seed of fire, 
which is superior and prior to any particular combustion. The 
mantra offers a body of power to the individual will. The texts say 
that jaiva-shakti (the power of the individual) is exalted by mantra- 
shakti in a daivi-shakti, which is a divine power; thus, in the term 
vajra-vak, because of the living word, the term vajra could also mean 
"scepter." Moreover, some Western magical traditions taught that 
"spirits," "angels," and "elementals" must obey those who know 
their true names. In the Kabbala the initiate was called "Lord of the 
Name" (bal seem). It must be said that, also because of contingent 
factors, these Western formulations lack the completeness and the 
general metaphysical bases of their Hindu counterparts. 15 

The mantra has the value of one of sadhana's instruments; its 
power is obviously related to the power of other instruments, and 
it is defined, generally speaking, by the overall spiritual level that 
has been reached by the apprentice. 



115 



IX 



THE SECRET RITUAL 

THE USE OF ORGIES: 
INITIATORY SEXUAL MAGIC 



In Hindu and Shaivist Tantrism, the term panchatattva designates 
the so-called secret ritual, which is reserved for the viras. The 
texts give great importance to this ritual, and they even claim that 
if panchatattva is not practiced in one way or another, the worship 
of Shakti is impossible. 1 Since panchatattva includes the use of 
intoxicating beverages and the participation of women, in India it 
has been branded orgiastic and immoral. Consequently, some West- 
erners have formulated a negative opinion of Tantrism. The em- 
ployment of sex for initiatory, ecstatic, and magical purposes is 
not a prerogative of Hindu Tantrism alone, however. It is also 
found in Buddhist Tantrism, in Tantric trends within Vaishnavism, 
and in the so-called schools of Sahajiya and of the natha-siddhas. I 
will discuss separately the use of sex at a yogic level. 

Panchatattva literally means five elements. Reference is made to 
"five substances to be employed." These substances have been 
associated to the five great elements in the following way. Sexual 
intercourse (maithuna) corresponds to ether; wine or inebriating 
drinks (madya) to air; meat (mamsa) to fire; fish (matsya) to water; 
some cereals (mudra) to earth. Since the names of all five sub- 
stances begin with the letter m, the secret Tantric ritual has also 
been called panchamakara, "the ritual of the five ms." 

116 



The Secret Ritual 

The ritual assumes various meanings according to the level at 
which it is performed. In its most exoteric version, which is prac- 
ticed in the Way of the Right Hand, the ritual aims at implementing 
the sacralization of the natural functions of nutrition and sex. The 
basic idea is that the ritual is not supposed to be a sophisticated 
ceremony overlapping real life, but that, on the contrary, it should 
affect life and permeate even its most practical dimensions. Any- 
thing that the animalistic person (pashu) does in an obtuse way, 
being driven by the tamasic impulses of need and greed, must be 
performed by the vira with an open and liberated mind, as if it 
were a ritual or a cosmic offering. 

All of this still does not have a specifically Tantric character. 
The sacralization and ritualization of life has been a characteristic 
of Hindu civilization as well as of any other traditional civilization, 
with the exception of some strict ascetic groups. There is also a 
Christian saying: "Eat and drink for the glory of God." The pre- 
Christian West knew sacrificial meals. The Roman epulae for a very 
long time had a religious and symbolic counterpart; in them there 
was a reflection of the ancient belief concerning the encounter 
between humankind and the gods. 

A difficulty may arise when, besides food, Tantrism advo- 
cates the inclusion of women and of intoxicating beverages. This 
difficulty may be felt only from the standpoint of the religion that 
became predominant in the West. This religion, Christianity, has 
been dominated by a sex phobia, and it has considered the sexual 
act impure and unfit to be sacralized. This negative attitude should 
be considered anomalous, however, considering that the sacral- 
ization of sex and the conception of the sexual sacrum were typi- 
cal of several traditional civilizations. This conception, inciden- 
tally, is also to be found in India. It was a Vedic idea that sexual 
union could be elevated to the rank of ieros gamos, a sacred union 
and a religious act, and that in these terms it could even have a 
propitiating spiritual power. 4 In the Upanishads sexual union is 
represented as a sacrificial action (the woman and her sexual 
organ are the fire in which the sacrifice is burned). In them it is 
possible to find various formulas that propitiate the cosmic 
ritualization of a conscientiously performed intercourse (not of a 
merely lusty one), in which man relates to woman as Heaven to 
Earth. 5 

Even the tradition of sacred beverages and of ritual libations is 
very ancient and is found in several civilizations. As far as India is 
concerned, during the Vedic period soma, which is an intoxicating 
beverage derived from a bitter plant, played an important role. In 

117 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

the use of similar beverages, the ritual dimension should be distin- 
guished from the initiatory and magical dimension. 

Therefore, at this first level there is nothing extraordinary, at 
least from a Western point of view, in the so-called Tantric sexual 
ritual. In the West, in fact, it is quite normal to indulge in meat, sex, 
and liquor. In India the Tantric ritual is anomalous, however, since 
India is predominantly vegetarian and the use of intoxicating bev- 
erages is extremely restricted. 

Let us now turn to the second level of panchatattva, in which 
subtle elements play a major role. On the one hand, a text presents 
the image of a seed sown into the crack of a rock, which cannot 
sprout and germinate. 6 In this sense, the vira enjoys the five sub- 
stances (panchatattva) and absorbs and transforms the powers inher- 
ent to them. On the other hand, the possibilities offered by 
panchatattva are seen in relation to the correspondences of the five 
substances with the "five great elements" and even with the five 
vayus or pranadis, which are the currents of the vital breath (prana). 
Prana belongs to the plane of subtle forces and not to the plane of 
material and organic forces. Every organic function has as its coun- 
terpart a form of these forces. More specifically, whenever the 
organism ingests a given substance, a current of vital breath is 
activated. At that point, what takes place is a momentary surfacing 
or flashing of subtle forms of consciousness within the organic 
subconscious. Those who enjoy a high level of subtle sensibility, 
thanks to specific disciplines that I have previously described, will 
be able to notice these flashes and to enter into contact with the 
powers or "great elements" that correspond to the five substances. 
Experiences of this kind are facilitated by mental states in which the 
masses of psychic power enclosed in the body are activated through 
an adequate stimulation. 

Usually the correspondences are presented in the following 
terms. Ether corresponds to women and to prana (prana under- 
stood as an absorbing force that descends from the nostrils down to 
the heart, and as a subtle and solar current). Air corresponds to 
intoxicating beverages and to apana, which is a current flowing 
downward from the heart, through an action that resists any unifi- 
cation process. Fire corresponds to meat and to samana, which is the 
current of organic assimilation, which operates by altering and by 
amalgamating. Water corresponds to fish and to udana, the fluid 
breath that regulates bodily discharges. Earth corresponds to starchy 
foods and to vyana, which is an incorporating current. When resort- 
ing to panchatattva at this second level, one should be able to detect 



118 



The Secret Ritual 

and to differentiate these effects as well as the subtle modifications 
that are determined by the five substances. According to those who 
perform such practices, in the case of the participation of women, 
the dominating perception is the feeling of something that breaks 
off and becomes detached. In the case of intoxicating beverages one 
experiences the feeling of expanding and of disappearing into thin 
air. In the case of starchy foods, one has the feeling of being 
wounded. These are, for the most part, negative sensations that 
need to be transformed into active states. 

It is well known that in the context of ascetic and initiatory 
disciplines, sexual abstinence is highly recommended, since sex is 
reputed to be an obstacle to spiritual development. Everything 
depends on one's attitude, however. The view of the Path of the 
Left Hand is well known: to transform the negative into positive. 
Usually, indulgence in sex and in alcohol carries dissipating conse- 
quences from a spiritual as well as from a psychological point of 
view. But if one is endowed with the principle of a pure and 
detached force (virya), the very same dissipating states can bring 
release, favor a process of self-transcendence, and reduce tamasic 
residues. 

As far as eating meat (instead of following a vegetarian regi- 
men) is concerned, this is a different story. The consumption of 
meat is discouraged from a spiritual standpoint because of the fear 
of "infections," since the assimilation of this kind of food by the 
human organism involves the assimilation of subtle and psycho- 
logical elements found in the subhuman and animal dimensions. 
The danger can be avoided if one possesses a sensibility acute 
enough to be aware of these infections and of the presence of a 
"fire" powerful enough to transform and to absorb them. In that 
event, the activation of the animal and elementary substratum en- 
ables one to absorb a stronger power. This situation reminds us of 
the seed sown in the crack of a rock and of the general Tantric 
principle of transforming poisonous substances into vital energies, 
"into veins and arteries." This is probably why it has been claimed 
that the ritual use of intoxicating beverages, in the context of 
panchatattva, makes old people become young again; that consump- 
tion of meat improves one's mind, inner energy, and strength; and 
that the consumption of fish restores one's generative power. 

It is clear by now that panchatattva is a sacred ritual reserved 
for the viras, and that it should not be popularized or practiced by 
pashus (especially in regard to sex and alcohol). The same applies 
to the Buddhist and Hindu varieties of such a ritual. 



119 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

As far as intoxicating beverages are concerned, I have already 
mentioned that their employment as sacred beverages dates back 
many centuries and is found in several traditions. I would like to 
emphasize the role that soma played in the Vedic tradition (soma is 
the equivalent of the Persian haoma). Soma has been considered as 
a "nectar of immortality" (amrita), a term that is etymologically 
identical to the Greek term ambrosia. Both terms literally mean "no 

o 

death." The Vedas also mention an immaterial or heavenly soma. 
According to one tradition, the knowledge and the use of the 
heavenly soma at one point was lost. In order to achieve ecstasy 
and states of "divine enthusiasm," (mania, in the platonic meaning 
of the term) humans needed the aid of the earthly soma, which is 
a beverage extracted from the bitter milkwee d. In concomitance 
with a right inner motivation and attitude, the ensuing inebriation 
may generate ecstatic and even initiatory feelings, hence the sacred- 
ness attributed to this beverage. In Dionysian practices, wine per- 
formed a similar function. In ancient mystery literature, the expres- 
sion "sacred orgy" is a technical expression, frequently employed. 9 
In Persian mysticism wine and inebriation have a double meaning, 
both literal and symbolical. In the context of the tradition of the 
Templar Knights, Guenon has remarked that the expression "to 
drink like a Templar" may have had a secret and magical meaning, 
very different from the exoteric and popular meaning that eventu- 
ally became predominant. Also, in P atanjali's Y og a-Sut ra (4:1), the 
mention of the "simple" substances associated with samadhi may 
refer to the use of analogous auxiliary elements. 

The employment of intoxicating beverages and of sexual orgies 
is also found in Tantrism. Wine is called, in this context, "causal 
water" (karanavari) and "water of wisdom" (jnamrita). In the 
Kularnava-Tantra it is written: "Brahman's form (rupa) is enclosed 
in the body. Wine can help to reveal it: this is why yogins use it. 
Those who use wine for their own selfish pleasure instead of seek- 
ing the knowledge of brahman are guilty of a serious offense, and 
are therefore damned." 

Another Tantric text sees in these substances the "liquid form" 
of Shakti herself, who is believed to be a redeeming goddess 
(Dravamayitara = "Savior in Liquid Form"). In this form she be- 
stows liberation and enjoyment of earthly goods and removes every 
sin. Wine "has always been drunk by those who have experienced 
the ultimate liberation, and by those who have either become initi- 
ated or who attempt to be initiated." At this level of panchatattva, 
intoxicating beverages should be drunk in view of liberation. Mor- 



120 



The Secret Ritual 

tal beings who resort to them by dominating their instincts and by 
following Shiva's law (dharma) are regarded as gods, and as "im- 
mortals on earth." 10 Reference to the law of Shiva, who is the god 
of active transcendence, is significant in this context. On the one 
hand the apprentice is encouraged to drink "until the sight or the 
mind is not affected." 11 On the other hand, in the Tantra there is a 
saying that has scandalized quite a few people: "One achieves 
liberation by drinking, by collapsing on the floor, and by getting up 
to drink some more." Some commentators have given an esoteric- 
symbolic interpretation to this saying, which, in their view, is re- 
lated to kundalini yoga. According to these scholars, the saying 
refers not to intoxicating beverages but rather to further efforts that 
are necessary in order to lead the awakened kundalini higher and 
higher within one's body. As in many other cases, however, this 
saying can have more than one meaning, and it may even be taken 
literally. The apprentice should reach a certain level of intoxication 
and then reaffirm himself and overcome any collapse, all the while 
preserving the consciousness and the fundamental sense of the 
experience. 

The ritual can have a collective dimension and thus resemble 
an orgy. It is performed in a circle or initiatory chain (chakra) of 
members of both sexes. In the ritual the use of wine is associated 
with the use of sex. In this context, though, those lascivious aspects 
that are usually evoked by the word orgy are mitigated by the 
presence of specific ritual procedures. It does not matter what the 
intoxicating beverage is extracted from (Indian wine is not made 
with grapes), but it is an essential requirement that the beverage be 
"purified" in order to produce the expected results. 

"To drink wine that has not been purified is like drinking 
poison." Wine that has not been purified turns the kaulas into 
brutes: they should never partake of it. This impure wine does not 
produce any results and the devata - divinity or shakti - who re- 
sides in it is not propitiated. The preliminary purification may 
require a complex, contemplative, and ritual procedure, which is 
aimed at inducing a state of being in which the apprentice effec- 
tively establishes a contact with spiritual forces and acts in an 
ecstatic and sacred way. This is almost a process of transubstantia- 
tion, in which the magical imagination and various mantras are 
present. Two of these mantras are, for instance, HRM (the mula- 
mantra of the primordial power) and PHAT ("the mantra of the 
sword"), which is often employed when the apprentice attempts to 
separate subtle elements from thick and material ones. 



121 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

The preliminary stages of the purification are practiced in a 
circle (chakra) under the guidance of the "lord of the circle" 
(chakrashvara) who sits in the middle of the circle in front of the 
elements that must be purified. The chakrashvara then pronounces 
the traditional formula concerning the oneness of the person per- 
forming the sacrifice, of the sacrifice itself, and of the god the 
sacrifice is offered to. Then he draws at his left side, in a bright red 
color, a graphic symbol consisting of two intersecting triangles, 
which represent the metaphysical dyad (the god and the goddess), 
with either a circle (representing emptiness) or another inverted 
triangle inscribed in the hexagram. The second triangle, pointing 
downward, represents Parashakti. It is the equivalent of the meta- 
physical emptiness and represents transcendence, which is beyond 
the divine dyad. A ritual vessel (kalasha) containing the intoxicating 
beverage is put on the hexagram. The lord of the circle then evokes 
the presence of the goddess in himself and in the beverage with the 
help of the magical imagination. Ritual formulas are employed. The 
most important visualization aimed at directing the process is that 
which evokes the vital principle (hamsah) in the form of a solar force 
radiating "in the middle of a pure sky" or in the form of a force 
residing in the intermediate region, located, just like air, between 
heaven and earth. This causes the operation to shift from a physical 
to a metaphysical plane. An important aspect in the purification 
process is the ritual of the covering, which is associated with a 
specific gesture. The vessel is covered with a veil to signify that the 
material beverage covers the sacred beverage. In the course of the 
ritual, the veil covering the goddess who is asleep in the beverage 
(Devi Sudha) is removed, and the wine in the vessel thus becomes 
a "heavenly drink" (divya-sudha). The goddess is also referred to as 
Amrita (ambrosia, or deathless element). The purification process is 
completed with the uplifting of the curse associated with such 
beverages. This curse is believed to have been cast on intoxicating 
beverages by Brahma because of the evil deeds that they tend to 
promote. We may conclude that this, rather than an allegory, is a 
ritual neutralization of the negative effects resulting from the con- 
sumption of this kind of beverage. Finally, the lord of the circle 
imagines the god and the goddess having intercourse inside the 
intoxicating beverage, which gradually becomes saturated with the 
deathless element. All of this creates the inner and subtle condi- 
tions necessary for a spiritually fruitful consumption of these bev- 
erages. The efficacy of the ritual is increased by the fluid vortex that 
is fed by the couples surrounding the chakrashvara as they evoke the 



122 



The Secret Ritual 

same images and as they perform the same spiritual actions. It is 
said that the role of the lord of the circle may be played only by one 
who has been fully initiated. He alone can direct the ritual and 
distribute the beverage. Once these requirements are fulfilled, the 
initiatory chain or circle is believed to be divine. Only those 
"who are pure of heart, who are unaffected by the external world, 
who see no differences, but to whom all things are the same, and 
who have realized the brahman," 14 may become part of this chain. 
The Rudrayamala even says that wine should be drunk exclusively 
during the ritual. 

What has been said so far should make it clear that panchatattva 
is not an orgy in the popular and profane sense of the word, even 
though it is possible to encounter degenerated and dissolute ver- 
sions of it. 



MAITHUNA 

Having described the role that beverages play in panchatattva, let us 
now examine the role of sacred sexual intercourse (maithuna), which 
has been associated with the element ether. It is important to dis- 
tinguish several planes or levels in maithuna. 

First, it is possible to detect some residues of obscure practices 
that are derived from sorcery rather than from magic. This is the 
case, for instance, of those rituals in which a man, in order to 
achieve certain powers (siddhis), attempts to capture female enti- 
ties (yakshini or dakini). The apprentice seduces and subdues these 
entities by casting a spell on a real woman and by possessing this 
real woman in a deserted place, such as a forest or a cemetery. It 
must be noted, however, that the pattern of these obscure practices 
is analogous to that of initiatory practices, so much so that the latter 
could be considered an elevation of the former onto a higher plane. 
Conversely, the obscure rituals may be considered a degenerated or 
demonic facsimile of the initiatory practices. 

Second, it is important to acknowledge the role of collective 
orgiastic ceremonies. Some people saw in these practices the sur- 
vival or the continuation of seasonal fertility rites. It is well known 
that the agrarian and seasonal interpretation of various ceremonies 
is an obsession of ethnologists and of some historians of religion. 
The main and basic purpose of the practice of orgies is a wild de- 
conditioning of one's being. Some obscure forms of ecstasy are real- 
ized through promiscuity, the temporary removal of all inhibitions, 
and the revocation or orgiastic reenactment of the primordial chaos. 



123 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

It should be noted that some orgiastic collective ceremonies 
practiced in Tantrism promote depersonalization and the complete 
abrogation of all moral taboos. In fact, besides those orgies in which 
men choose their sexual partners, there are other kinds of orgies in 
which no personal choice is allowed, and in which the sexual 
partner is assigned at random. Women "put their jackets in a 
heap"; each man gets his companion by lot by selecting a jacket out 
of the heap of the shaktis' garments. His Shakti is the woman to 
whom the jacket belongs. 15 If the woman is one's daughter or sister, 
the rules are not changed and one is supposed to go on with the 
ritual. In Tantrism one may find the ritualization of sexual orgies to 
parallel the ritualization of intoxicating beverages. These are rituals 
practiced by a circle (chakra or rasamandala = "the circle of intoxica- 
tion or of frenzied emotions") made up of couples. A true vira is 
exempt from the rule, which applies to lower-level members, pre- 
scribing the use of one's wife, and thus he can use any woman he 
pleases. "Shiva's marriage" is also allowed in this context. This is a 
temporary union (Shiva is the "patron saint" of all that is out of the 
norm) with a young woman, which has to be consummated inside 
the chakra. This union, although not sanctioned by the traditional 
Hindu marriage ceremony, can be repeated several times. Only 
pashus are excluded from this practice, no matter what caste they 
belong to. The ritualization of an orgy is also guaranteed by the 
number of couples participating in it (fifty). Fifty is the number of 
the letters in the Sanskrit alphabet, which correspond to as many 
cosmic powers. The couples form a circle and "the lord of the 
circle" (chakrasvara) and his partner sit in the middle of it. It is also 
a symbolic and highly ritualistic fact that while all women are 
scantily dressed, only the lord of the circle's partner is totally 
naked. As every woman represents Shakti or prakriti, the naked 
woman is the image of Shakti or of prakriti free of forms, at an 
elemental level. 

Unfortunately we do not possess any text outlining the devel- 
opment of the orgiastic ceremony. As in the case of intoxicating 
beverages, we may suppose the creation of a magical-ecstatic atmo- 
sphere and of some kind of fluid vortex originating from the couple 
sitting in the middle of the circle. This assumption may be war- 
ranted by the fact that chakras of this kind are summoned for 
practical purposes, for instance, to propitiate the good outcome of 
a king's military expedition. In this case the ritual orgy is per- 
formed in order to generate a spiritual state that will render the 
magical action efficacious. 



124 



The Secret Ritual 

Since the aim of the orgy is an immanent and spiritual one, the 
rules that apply to collective sexual orgies of panchatattva are the 
same that apply to the sexual intercourse of a single couple. Every 
man embodies the Shiva principle (purusha), while every woman 
embodies the Shakti principle (prakriti). During the ritual the man 
and the woman are supposed to identify, respectively, with their 
corresponding spiritual principles. Their union reproduces the union 
of the divine couple. The two principles (which in the manifested 
and conditioned world appear to be separated according to a dual- 
ism, the main expression of which is the male/female dyad) are 
temporarily represented, thus evoking the "androgynous Shiva" 
(Ardhanarishvara) and the oneness of the principle. From an expe- 
riential point of view, the sexual union experienced in this way has 
a liberating power that abrogates the laws of duality, generates an 
ecstatic feeling, and leads, at least temporarily, beyond the limits of 
the individual and samsaric consciousness. Man and woman be- 
come one with their respective ontological principles (Shiva and 
Devi), which are present in their being and in their body. Since the 
dualistic law is suspended, samata, the state of "identity" and of 
transcendence also known as sahaja, can be obtained during what is 
commonly referred to as samarasa (the simultaneous erotic rapture 
and consequent orgasm that unite two beings during intercourse). 
In other words, a special form of exalted and transfigured pleasure 
may be experienced, which is the foreshadow of sambhodi itself, 
namely, the absolute radical enlightenment and the achievement of 
the unconditioned sahaja. The Kularnava-Tantra even claims that 
the supreme union can be achieved only through sexual inter- 
course. 

This individual practice obviously grants results that are spir- 
itually far more effective than those achieved in an orgy. Sexual 
experiences of an ecstatic type should be distinguished from those 
of a properly initiatory and yogic type, in which the sexual union 
is performed after a due process is observed. The yogin first applies 
a specific technique and emphasizes the ritualization and the evo- 
cation process. This is what characterizes the further level in the 
Tantric participation of women. 

Let us now examine some interesting details. First of all, the 
young woman participating in the panchatattva and in similar ritu- 
als is called, besides shakti, rati. This word means "the beginning of 
rasa." Rasa, in turn, means rapture, intense emotion, and even or- 
gasm. It should be noted that ancient Hindu tradition associated 
the state of intoxication with the Great Goddess in one of her forms, 



125 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

that of Varunani. In the Pali language though, varuni designates an 
intoxicating beverage and even an intoxicating woman. There is no 
doubt concerning the relationship between varuni and intoxicating 
beverages, since in some texts the expression "to drink Devi Varuni" 
refers to the consumption of such drinks. Even in the hymns of the 
strict ascetic Shankara, the goddess is associated with them, by 
virtue of being described as holding a cup or as being drunk. In this 
archetype or divine image the woman is perceived as the embodi- 
ment of rapture and of intoxication, so much so that her presence 
is related to the use of intoxicating beverages in the secret ritual of 
the Path of the Left Hand. In conclusion, the name rati ascribed to 
the vira's sexual partner designates one "whose essence is intoxica- 
tion." 

The Sahajiya school has elaborated an almost scholastic classi- 
fication of various ratis, and it has indicated vishesha-rati as an 
exception and as the most proper type for initiatory practices. 
"Ordinary" women (samanya-rati) and "lustful" women (sadharani- 
rati) should be excluded from the ritual. On an initiatory level, it is 
said that while a vira belonging to the lower grades of the hierarchy 
should avail himself only of his spouse, this restriction does not 
apply to a true Siddha, who is free to join with any woman in the 
course of the ritual, without restriction of caste. The texts of 
Vajrayana and of Tantric Vaishnavism describe the vira's partner as 
a type of woman that most Westerners would characterize as "dis- 
solute." In truth, this is no longer the traditional marriage cer- 
emony typical of the higher Aryan castes, but rather a technical 
magical and yogic operation in which the woman is valued not for 
her own individual qualities but only insofar as she represents an 
elemental force and some sort of fluid to be used in a process of 
spiritual "combustion." Tantric Vaishnavism sanctions this irregu- 
lar union since (1) the divine couple, which a man and a woman 
should represent in their union, is that of Krishna and Radha, a 
couple violating the conjugal bond, and (2) the "ideal" and intense 
love is not the love existing between a married couple, but rather 
is parakya love, which is love for a young girl 16 

Some texts consider various degrees of a woman's nudity. In 
the collective rituals only the lord of the circle's partner is stark 
naked. This is allowed only for the viras of higher levels. The 
ritualistic-symbolic implications of these norms are obvious: a 
woman's nudity evokes the naked, elementary state of Shakti, whom 
she incarnates. At a higher level, in which magical evocations are 
employed together with ritualism and symbolism, physical naked- 



126 



The Secret Ritual 

ness symbolizes a woman devoid of her own individuality, and of 
her human and personal characteristics. This woman becomes the 
embodiment of the "absolute woman," and of a power that may be 
so dangerous that only those who have a special Shaivist spiritual 
qualification can truly partake of her without incurring any serious 
consequence. An alchemical-Hermetic saying goes: "Happy are the 
Actaeons who can see the naked Diana and not die," in reference to 
the invulnerable and deadly Diana 

At the level of individual initiatory exercises, it is said that a 
young woman must be consecrated prior to her participation, and 
initiated and instructed in the art of mudras, the magical and 
ritualistic positions. These women, besides rati and shakti, are some- 
times referred to as mudra, a word that designates the yogic ritual 
positions that induce a given fluid state. The term designates the 
young woman in reference not only to the positions that she will 
assume during lovemaking but also to the evocation of a power 
within her, which assimilates her to a magical form of a divinity or 
to a divine attribute. Another designation for the woman is lata, 
which means "climbing plant." The term alludes to a position in 
which the woman clings to the man as he is sitting still, thus 
playing the active role in the sacred intercourse (viparita maithuna). 
The texts often refer to a preliminary phase based on the visualiza- 
tion of the asana (ritual postures) of the divine couple Shiva and 
Shakti. The woman must be loved "according to the ritual." She 
must first be worshiped (puja) and then possessed and enjoyed 
(bhoga). The meaning of worship varies according to the Tantric 
levels at which it is practiced. On an initiatory and magical level, it 
corresponds to the already-mentioned animation and projection of 
an image through the magical imagination, until the devata is evoked 
and invited into the flesh and blood of the young woman. To 
designate this procedure, the technical term aropa is employed, 
which means "bestowal of a different nature" onto an object, while 
its form and sensible appearances (rupa) remain the same. In this 
case what takes place is a temporary transubstantiation of the 
woman, which gives rise in her to a "real presence," or to the 
"absolute woman." Aropa is considered a necessary condition. 

Another term designating women engaged in Tantric sexual 
practices, besides rati, shakti, mudra, and lata, is vidya, a word that 
means "knowledge," "wisdom," not in an abstract and intellectual 
sense, but in the sense of an awakening and transfiguring power. 
This is related to an aspect of femininity to which one may associate 
the allusions, found in some texts, to woman as guru, to the "ini- 



127 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

tiating woman," to the "vajra's mother," or to the "origin of tran- 
scendent knowledge." We should not exclude the likelihood that 
such allusions relate to a matriarchical area (especially when the 
superiority of an initiation bestowed by a woman is upheld), to 
those "women's mysteries" that are found even in the ancient West, 
and which are not without relation to the sacred prostitution exer- 
cised in the name of a female deity, the Great Goddess. In this 
context, man participates in the sacrum only through woman and 
through intercourse with her. It is legitimate to think that all of this 
is closely associated to Tantrism, and that in a Tantric context Shiva 
(whose principle is represented by man) is incapable of action 
unless he is vivified by Shakti. Thus, the yogini, the vira's partner, 
is credited with the power to "free the essence of the I." In a 
Vishvasara-Tantra hymn it said that Durga "confers buddhi," buddhi 
meaning the transcendent intellect. From another point of view, the 
woman is potentially endowed with this principle, which she un- 
leashes together with the inebriation and feeling of ecstasy induced 
by it. Thus in Buddhist Tantras, in which prajna has the same 
meaning of vidya, we find unorthodox buddhas who achieve en- 
lightenment through intercourse with a young woman. On the 
metaphysical plane, these Tantras indicate as the supreme state the 
so-called mahasukhakaya, which is beyond mere nirvana. On this 
plane, Buddha is embraced by Shakti, or by Tara. Only on this 
plane do the buddhas enjoy full possession of buddhatva, thanks to 
the ecstasy, of which she is the source, and to the creating power, 
of which she is the origin. In Vajrayana spiritual realization re- 
quires the union, symbolically represented as an embrace, of prajna 
and upaya, that is, of the illuminating knowledge (female principle) 
and of the operating power (male principle). The symbol, in turn, 
is turned into reality: woman embodies prajna, and man upaya, and 
their sexual union is called vajrapadmasamskara (samskara = action, 
sacrament, or magical operation; vajra and padma designate the 
male and female sexual organs). 

This distribution of the masculine and feminine roles appears 
to exclude a matriarchical initiation, or an initiation in which the 
female principle is predominant. The woman is almost a mother 
figure ("the womb of the vajra"), since she generates the excitement 
and the ecstasy that vivify and enlighten the I principle of the man, 
who is the potential bearer of the diamond-thunderbolt (vajra). But 
this mother is also the woman with whom the man commits "in- 
cest," in the context of a union in which the moment of the vajra's 
birth and awakening coincides with the moment of the shakti's 



128 



The Secret Ritual 

penetration and absorption. We may assume, therefore, that from 
an inner point of view the embrace consists of two phases, the 
meaning of which is best expressed by European alchemical 
Hermetism. Hermetists employ the symbol of the lunar female who 
prevails over the solar male, absorbs him, and makes him disap- 
pear within herself. Eventually the male asserts himself, mounts the 
woman, and reduces her to his own nature. This is symbolized by 
the mother's generating the son and by the son generating, in turn, 
the mother. In Tantric terms, this means that Shakti assumes Shiva's 
form, and that she becomes chidrupini-shakti. I previously discussed 
this transformation on a cosmological plane, as the meaning of the 
second phase of the manifestation (the ascending phase). Under 
this particular aspect, the vira's mate is purely Shaktic; she is the 
"absolute woman" led by an elementary desire. She is animated by 
the same force yearning for the Vajrasattva, the male principle that 
quiets her, soothes her tension, and bathes her in the cold, pure 
light of the magical one. 

For the Tantric practice to be efficacious, it must awaken the 
pure Shaktic quality in femininity and act as something dangerous 
and destructive, for this is the essence of the Path of the Left Hand, 
namely, to seek out dissolving, "toxic" situations and to find in 
them liberation as the final outcome. Precisely because of the 
woman's characteristics and because of the nature of the states that 
arise during intercourse with her, it is a categorical necessity for 
those who follow the pure ascetic and contemplative path to stay 

1 Q 

away from her. On the other hand, when it is necessary that the 
young woman, besides her natural qualifications, be initiated and 
adequately trained, it is likely that this training will extend to the 
art of physical love and to its magical counterparts. At a yogic level, 
as we shall learn later on, the young woman is required to have a 
special control of the vaginal muscles. Those who are familiar with 
the erotic Hindu treatises know that they suggest erotic positions 
that European women would not even consider, because they re- 
quire a very difficult physical training. 

That the vira should not lose control of himself during the 
sexual experience, and that the interpretation of such an experience 
in terms of the two phases alluded by the Hermetic-alchemical 
symbolism is truly adequate, is beyond any doubt. Generally speak- 
ing, there are precepts concerning the purification of the will: "Domi- 
nating his senses, detached, impassible when confronted by pairs of 
opposites, steady in the principle of his own strength," the vira 
practices panchatattva. The Kularnava-Tantra repeats that he must 



129 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

be well determined in his mind and will, and that his senses must 
be purified and mastered. Another text specifies that this self- 
control should be maintained throughout all the stages of passion 
(rasa) that arise during intercourse. The congenital tendency in the 
pashu to lose himself in physical pleasure and to give in to any 
desire of the flesh must be neutralized; in all likelihood the expres- 
sion "purity of the senses" should be understood in these terms. 
Vajrayana texts warn against the abuse of sexual practices and call 
"two-legged beasts" those who are guilty of such abuses, and who 
therefore should not be mistaken for true viras. 

There is also a significant precept prohibiting the vira to sub- 
ject himself to hypnotic experiments. It is possible that the texts 
envisioned the danger of the vira becoming subject to a deleterious 
fascination during the encounter with the shakti-woman, and to a 
subsequent fall. It is also said that the body must be in perfect 
shape and strengthened through the use of hatha yoga, lest the 
crucial experience turn into fainting or swooning: "Without a per- 
fect body, the sahaja cannot realize himself." 

In relation to the principle according to which self-control must 
be exercised in all of the phases of sexual intercourse, sometimes a 
corresponding preliminary discipline is considered. In a ritual of 
the Sahajiya school, a man must spend time with the young woman 
he wishes to possess, and sleep where she sleeps, without touching 
her, on a separate bed, for a period of four months. After that, he 
should sleep next to her, on her left side, for another four months, 
and for four months on her right side, all this time without ever 
touching her. Only after this ordeal is he allowed to initiate the 
magical intercourse with the naked woman, thus beginning the 
operative phase. There are other, simplified forms of an analogous 
preliminary discipline. Their goal certainly does not consist in de- 
veloping a sense of familiarity, which would weaken the desire. It 
should not be left out that this ritual has two phases, the first one 
consisting in a "subtle" intercourse without physical contact ("pla- 
tonic"), the woman-goddess being the object of adoration. The 
second phase would be considered the extension of the first, in 
which the union is consummated on the physical plane as well, "in 
conformity to the ritual," which presupposes it. Such a supposition 
is plausible if we consider that these two phases are considered in 
some of the teachings of sexual magic as it is taught nowadays in 
the Western world. In any event, the preliminary exercise of one's 
self-control by lying next to the woman seems to have a specific 
meaning also when we consider the character of the technique to be 



130 



The Secret Ritual 

employed at a yogic level in order to prevent the usual outcome of 
average sexual intercourse. 

Let us now focus on this last level, which is part of hatha yoga. 
It is not easy to gather details from the texts, because they typically 
employ a cryptic language. Therefore, the same terms have at times 
a symbolical meaning, referring to ontological principles and to 
spiritual operations, and at other times they have a concrete and 
operative meaning, referring to organs, bodily substances, physical 
actions. Bindu, for instance, the "dot," a term we came across when 
dealing with Tantric metaphysics, may also signify male semen, or 
sperm. Vajra may signify the male sexual organ, and rajas the 
female vaginal secretions. Mudra may signify the woman and padma 
her sexual organ, also called yoni. One meaning does not exclude 
the other, not only because they refer to different planes, but also 
because the spiritual meanings or elements may represent the coun- 
terpart of material and even physiological procedures or elements, 
since every operation takes place on a double plane, physiological 
and transphysiological, at the same time. 

One thing is still not very clear. In hatha yoga sexual inter- 
course is considered a means to bring about a traumatic shift in the 
level of consciousness, as well as an effective opening to transcend- 
ence, but only when the intercourse is performed according to 
specific rules. These rules essentially prescribe the inhibition of the 
man's ejaculation and the release of even the smallest quantity of 
semen inside the woman's body. The semen should never be re- 
leased. In this context, orgasm is seen as separated from its physi- 
ological conditions; its peak, which in man culminates with ejacu- 
lation, is transformed and thus occasions the intuition that over- 
comes the limits of ordinary, finite consciousness and that leads to 
the realization of the One. Some texts, such as the Hatha- Yoga- 
Pradipika also mention some auxiliary procedures, such as suspen- 
sion of breath in its radical form (khecari-mudra, mudra here mean- 
ing "gesture-seal" rather than "woman"). By practicing khecari- 
mudra, it is said, "He cannot be aroused by the most passionate 
embrace, even if he were in the hands of an ecstatic lover." 19 Men- 
tion is made of a special type of mudra - vajroli-mudra or yoni- 
mudra. One, however, should not be deceived by the literal inter- 
pretation of the texts, according to which the procedure being 
discussed appears to be a merely physiological one. It is said: "Even 
when the fluid has been released into the female sexual organ, he 
[the yogin] can make it reascend to its source through the yoni- 
mudra." And also: "The yogin who can withhold his semen over- 



131 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

comes death. Just as the release of bindu leads to death, likewise its 
withholding leads to life." 20 

A woman properly trained in erotic techniques could help the 
yogin by compressing the male organ with her vaginal muscles 
right before ejaculation occurs. However, it is not easy to imagine 
how that is possible. Considering the tumescence of the male organ 
(lingam), even if a woman was endowed with highly developed 
vaginal muscles, it is unlikely that her initiative would be effective. 
On the contrary, it is most likely to produce the opposite effects, 
since usually this kind of pressure increases the man's excitement, 
thus making ejaculation irrepressible. 

It seems to me that this technique may be best understood 
when seen in the light of other texts. In other texts, the inhibition 
of ejaculation is related to both the attainment of the bindu- siddhi, or 
of the energy contained in the bindu, and to the occult doctrine of 
the deathless element, or ambrosia. This deathless element is be- 
lieved to descend from the middle of the forehead, and to be 
consumed and burned under the species of semen: hence the cor- 
ruptibility of the human organism. This is not a mechanical proce- 
dure consisting in withholding a physical substance and in direct- 
ing its movement inside the physical organs. It is rather an inner 
action that has as its object the force that "precipitates" and degen- 
erates into semen. The purpose of this action is to suspend such a 
precipitation, and to induce this force to act on a different, or better, 
on a transphysiological plane. Thus it can be understood that the 
aforesaid mudra of the suspension of breath may be of great help, 
especially at the peak of intercourse, when all the material and 
emotional conditions for the precipitation of bindu and for' ejacula- 
tion are present. After all, this interpretation is supported by the 
indications concerning yet another mudra, the amaroli-mudra, which 
is the woman's equivalent to the man's vajroli-mudra. The woman is 
required to operate an analogous suspension and retention of fluid, 
the designation of which is difficult to assess. 

We should consider two factors in reference to the nonemission 
of semen. The first factor is that in the context of ordinary sexual 
love, and in some cases when an intense desire for a woman is 
present, the result may be absence of ejaculation. The second factor 
is that all the evocative processes provoke a natural shift of con- 
sciousness onto the subtle plane, which occurs in some sort of 
trance. This shift, in turn, causes the separation of vital energies 
from the physical and physiological plane; this may prevent ejacu- 
lation. Incidentally, the inability to achieve ejaculation is also found 



132 



The Secret Ritual 

in the case of the consumption of drugs, since their use provokes, 
though in a passive way, the shift of consciousness onto the subtle 
plane. Even without the aforesaid yogic procedures, these two 
factors cannot but facilitate the fundamental operation of vajroli- 
mudra. 

Once the precipitation of the semen-bindu is arrested, what 
usually corresponds to the fleeting peak of the orgasmic crisis is 
also stabilized in an exalted and transfigured form, or in a state of 
active trance. The texts speak of an "endless union," namely, of a 
state that lasts for a long time. Reference is made to an analogous 
theory concerning fire and the other elements. As there is an 
ungenerated and eternal fire that manifests itself in various com- 
bustion processes, likewise there is an ungenerated concupiscence, 
which corresponds to that which is expressed in the union of the 
divine couple Shiva and Shakti. The passion experienced by men 
and women during their mating is merely a pale, temporary, and 
contingent reflection of the divine concupiscence. It is assumed that 
a magical intercourse, when performed according to the aforesaid 
conditions, activates, attracts, and fixes such a pleasure in a tran- 
scendent form, which is "without beginning or end": hence the 
occurrence of an orgasmic peak that lasts, instead of the fainting 
feeling that men and women usually experience after the fleeting 
orgasmic crisis. 

Thus, in the state called samarasa ("identity of pleasure," or 
unitive ecstasy, representing the fusion and dissolutive absorption 
of the male principle into the Shakti employed), the goal at a yogic 
level is to experience the "thunderbolt" element, or that which is 
primordial, "ungenerated," or "unconditioned." The term for "unge- 
nerated," sahaja, which has come to designate a Tan trie school, has 
been used by Kanha (a late Madhyamika Buddhist school) as syn- 
onymous with "emptiness" or "transcendence." The texts talk about 
"immobilizing the king of the spirit through the identity of pleasure 
in the ungenerated state," which has as a consequence the immedi- 
ate attainment of the principle at the basis of all kinds of magic, 
namely, the overcoming of time and of death. The sexual union 
crosses into the union of padma (which symbolizes the enlightening 
knowledge as well as the female organ and secretions) and vajra 
(which is the active spiritual principle as well as the male organ) 
with the result of producing the state of emptiness. 

A Kabbalist-Hermetic text, the Asch mezareph (5), indicates the 
essential procedure through an esoteric interpretation of the biblical 
episode of Phineas's spear thrust, who "pierced in locis genitalibus 



133 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

the solar Israelite man and the lunar Midianite woman as they were 
having sexual intercourse. The sharpness and the strength of iron, 
by acting on matter, purifies it from all impurities. . . . Phineas's 
spear not only slays the male Sulphur but it also kills his female. 
And so they die, mixing their blood in the same one generation. 

9 1 

Then Phineas's wonders begin." 

In this cryptic passage, taken from a Jewish source, we may 
gather an analogous teaching at an initiatory level concerning sexual 
magic. Significantly, it is said that in such practices one has to 
experience death in order to reach life; we may recall that orgasm 
is poetically referred to as "sweet death." The association of love 
and death is a famous theme found in several traditions and even 
in literature. This theme, if we go beyond the limits of a stereotypi- 
cal and decadent romanticism, may be transferred onto an objec- 
tive, operative plane. What is important is to activate fully that 
dimension of transcendence that is also hidden in all forms of 

9 9 

intense profane sexual love. Unlike the pashu, the ordinary man, 
who undergoes pleasure and experiences the surfacing of that tran- 
scendence as a spasm that impairs, dominates, and dissolves his 
inner being, the initiated person is supremely active and brings 
about some sort of enlightening short circuit. The stopping of the 
seminal flow, especially in unison with the suspension of breath, 
"slays the manas." What ensues is a state of active trance through 
a flow that "travels upstream," beyond this conditioned human 
existence. To know this procedure is considered the essential thing. 

As an example of coded expositions, I will quote from Sha- 
hidullah's commentary to Kanha and to the Doha-Kosha: 

The supreme and most exalted enjoyment (paramahasukha) con- 
sists in the suppression of thought, in order that thought may 
become nonthought, in the state of the ungenerated. When breath 
and thought converge in the unity of enjoyment (samarasa) one 
achieves the supreme, great joy, and true annihilation. The joy 
consisting in the I's annihilation may be achieved during sexual 
intercourse, in the state of identity of enjoyment, when shakra and 
rajas are immobilized. 

According to these teachings, the ritual that employs sex pro- 
vokes, just as in hatha yoga, the suspension of the two currents ida 
and pingala, more on which later, as well as the ascent of the vital 
force through the sushumna. This exercise should be practiced only 
in the middle of the night, because of analogical and subtle reasons. 



134 



The Secret Ritual 

Mantras and images, too, seem to play a role in the develop- 
ment of the operation. The mantra that is found in the Hindu texts 
is Kali's own mantra, KRIM. Obviously, it is believed to have been 
awakened, at least partially. The basic image associated with it, in 
the course of practice, is that of the goddess who manifests herself 
in rati and who is this rati. The details of such an image resemble 
cult figures, and they are such that their suggestive and exciting 
power is strictly connected to the entire Hindu or Tibetan tradition. 
The image of Kali naked, surrounded by flames, her hair loose, 
wearing a necklace of severed heads, and dancing on the still body 
of Shiva, probably evokes a passionate and unleashed attitude. 
Some details can be found in a text called the Prapankasara-Tantra 
(28:27ff); in this text it is said that a woman must be realized as fire. 
In the following phases of the experience, a reference is made to a 
fire that, once the combustible material has been consumed, changes 
into a subtle state, free of all manifested forms. Then Shakti em- 
braces Shiva and becomes one thing with him: this corresponds to 
the man's breaking point, to the transformation and to the growth 
into a timeless dimension of the sexual and orgasmic climax, which 
is caused by the ejaculation into the woman. 

Considering the constant and faithful bearing of the symbolic, 
ritualistic, and metaphysical structures on the human and concrete 
plane, it is easy to understand why viparita-maithuna is chosen for 
the aforesaid yogic sexual practices. As I have indicated, this type 
of sexual intercourse is characterized by the woman wrapping her 
legs around the man and performing the acts of love on him as he 
sits still (the ritualistic stillness is the symbol of Shiva's unchanging 
nature). 

Let us now consider the sexual experience from the woman's 
point of view. In the case of a collective orgy, whether of a promis- 
cuous or of a ritualistic type, the level of participation of men and 
women is about the same. What women are supposed to do at a 
yogic level is not very clear because of the obscure language em- 
ployed by the texts. Some texts seem to consider a special mudra 
(in the sense of an operation or gesture) for women, namely, the so- 
called amaroli-mudra, which is the counterpart of the vajroli-mudra, 
designating the suspension of ejaculation. In the Sahajiya texts the 
stopping and the immobilization are referred both to the male 
(shukra) and to the female "semen," and the two operations must 
occur simultaneously, in both man and woman, with the rising of 
the orgasmic tide. It is not clear what is meant by female semen. 
Mention is made of the "woman's rajas," but rajas has various 



135 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

meanings, among them "menstrual blood" and "vaginal secretions." 
Menstruation is out of the question, and it is also unlikely that 
when the texts refer to a woman's retention or immobilization of 
fluid they are actually referring to vaginal secretions. These secre- 
tions, in fact, are usually produced at an early stage of a woman's 
excitement, and sometimes they are even lacking. It is also unlikely 
that the texts refer to the woman's ovum, which does not descend 
into the woman's uterus when orgasm occurs. Thus we are left with 
an interpretation that is neither physiological or material: the 
woman's "semen" is a force that must be stopped before it degen- 
erates into orgasm and into mere physical pleasure. This interpre- 
tation, besides explaining an otherwise unintelligible amaroli-mudra 
in the woman, confirms the analogous interpretation given to vajroli- 
mudra, the suspension of man's semen. In any event, it is clear that 
a woman's initiative is not supposed to jeopardize what I have 
called her "potentiality for combustion," which is her main part. It 
could not be otherwise, considering that during the intercourse the 
vira, after suspending his semen, absorbs the woman's rajas, which 
it caused to flow, and is nourished by it The woman's rajas is 
therefore present as a fluid or magical force that feeds the develop- 
ment of the samarasa state. This state would probably be affected if 
the woman withdrew from the intercourse or if she suddenly gave 
in to orgasm. 

Let me now mention an unusual sexual practice found in Tantric 
Buddhism, whose purpose is regeneration in an almost literal and 
physical sense. This practice is called mahayoga or mahasadhana. It is 
difficult to define the plane on which it takes place. In it, "realized" 
images seem to play the key role. The man must imagine to be dead 
to his present existence, and now, taking the form of some kind of 
fecundating semen, he must penetrate a "supernatural matrix" 
(garbhadhatu). In a preliminary exercise, which consists in contem- 
plation or dhyana, he duly recalls the process leading to his human 
birth. Man evokes the so-called antarabhava, which, according to a 
Hindu view, must be present at conception in addition to the egg 
and sperm cells. At the same time he must visualize the hieros 
gamos, the sacred intercourse between a god and a goddess, and he 
must evoke in himself an intense yearning for the goddess Tara. 
When a man couples with and desires a woman, the antarabhava 
identifies with the future father and during orgasm enters into the 
woman, being carried inside the semen. In the same fashion, an 
analogous process is imagined. In this process, the vajra, or buddha 
principle, which is carried by the god coupling with Tara, takes the 
place of the antarabhava. This preliminary dhyana aims at creating 

136 



The Secret Ritual 

the scenario for the sexual union that will ensue, and at evoking 
and at directing one's inner powers. This practice also contemplates 
the use of mantras and the vivification of the body of the young 
woman through a nyasa. What ensues are various dedication and 
confirmation rituals, on which I am not going to elaborate. This 
Tantric Buddhist practice appears to be very complex. Its core idea 
is that of a regression into the prenatal state and of a regeneration 
to be accomplished with the same forces that intervene in the 
circumstances affecting conception and physical birth. The appren- 
tice attempts to enter into contact with these forces, and after 
successfully combining them with transforming images, he reenacts 
the procreative act, which is believed to generate transcendent and 
spiritual results. In this way one destroys one's birth by reenacting 
the drama that determined it, and by performing an act in which 
the samsaric antarabhava is substituted by a principle of a buddha 
or Shiva nature. In this act the divine woman, or Tara, is evoked 
and comes to life in the body of the earthly woman, which she takes 
over. 

It is only in these terms that we can approximately identify 
what concerns the employment of sex, while trying to find our way 
in the maze of illusions, the cryptic language, and the cultural 
images and symbols of Tantrism. In the Tantric yoga of sex, the 
idea of arising and of assuming the forces of desire (in order to 
make them self-consuming, that is, to transform, or better, to de- 
stroy their original nature) finds its most classical expression. Thus 
the practice that uses and excites the elementary power of desire 
(sexuality) is associated with the myth of Shiva as a mountain 
ascetic who through his frontal eye turns into ashes Kama, the god 
of concupiscence. This is a mythologization of what corresponds to 
vajroli-mudra. In fact, it is said that when the apprentice awakens 
the force of desire and when he performs japa (the procedure that 
awakens mantras) with a naked young woman (shakti), he becomes 
the earthly slayer of the god of love (smarahara). According to some 
Shaivist texts, these practices have a cathartic power; through them 
the kaula becomes free from all faults and achieves jivanmukti, 
namely, liberation while alive. Tantric apologetic works describe 
the kaula who is expert in the panchatattva as a being who subdues 
every human power, as one superior to any ruler, and as a diviner. 
According to Tantric Buddhism, Buddha was able to overcome 
Mara (= Smara), the god of this earth and of desire, and to acquire 
transcendent insights and magical powers, by virtue of having 
practiced Tantric rituals that employ women. 

Unlike what is proper to the viras of the lower grades and to 

137 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

the promiscuous orgiastic experience of the chakras, it is possible 
that a yogic level the operation of sexual magic will acquire an 
exceptional character. The goal is the initiatory and almost trau- 
matic opening of one's consciousness to the unconditioned. Once 
this is achieved through the participation of women, it is still 
possible to go beyond, either by abandoning the practice or by 
repeating it only in particular circumstances. Thus Vajrayana itself 
presents figures of Siddhas who, after practicing the sexual ritual 
and after having obviously reaped the benefits, renounce women, 
prescribe sexual continence, and abide by an austere discipline. 
Some texts suggest that to think otherwise is to commit a fatal 
mistake. But even in other cases, what I have said concerning the 
preparation, concerning all of the conditions necessary to a success- 
ful practice, and concerning the dangers inherent to these practices 
rules out the possibility that the viras' doctrine is merely a pretext 
and a cover-up for indulging in libidinous and dissolute pleasures. 
It is quite another thing, though, to claim that those who are 
Siddhas, those who have reached the end of the Way, may eventu- 
ally employ any woman of their choice, since they are free to do as 
they please. They do not know interdictions, and it is even claimed 
that Siddhas, rather than Brahmans, are able to make the best use 
of women. Obviously this applies to a different plane, that of the 
freedom enjoyed by the Tantric adept. 

It is important to specify the role that the yoga of sex occupies 
in the general hierarchy of sadhana's varieties. Some texts' hints 
may induce the reader to conclude that it may even lead to the 
awakening of kundalini, which is the main goal of hatha yoga, and 
that the end results of both types of yoga are more or less the same. 
Such a correspondence refers only to special forms or cases, how- 
ever. It is more probable that if the sexual practice, in its magical 
and initiatory aspect, provokes even partially kundalini's awaken- 
ing, kundalini, unlike what happens in classical yoga, is not mas- 
tered and led through the various powers and elements of spiritual 
corporeity (chakras). Especially at the level of panchatattva, we are 
confronted with a spiritual exploit that attempts to achieve, in a 
sudden intuition, the meaning of transcendence (sahaja) through the 
apex of a Dionysian experience that is transfigured and magically 
strengthened. The criticism that may be made from the perspective 
of classical yoga is that this is a transient achievement. 

Although sometimes the texts suggest that besides the vira, 
who is characterized by the rajas guna, even the divya, who is 
characterized by the sattva guna, may practice the panchatattva, the 



138 



The Secret Ritual 

proper domain of the second type is that of hatha yoga in the strict 
sense of the term. Even in the higher levels of panchatattva there is 
always an outer influence: the experience cannot be achieved by an 
individual without recourse to some external factors, such as, in the 
case of the most radical practices, intoxicating beverages and the 
participation of women. On the level of pure hatha yoga this influ- 
ence from the outside, or this external element, is eliminated. I have 
already quoted a saying of a divya: "What need do I have of any 
outer woman? I have an inner woman within myself." Sadhana is 
realized with one's own means, through operations that take place 
within one's body. 



139 



THE OCCULT CORPORETTY 

The Serpent Power: 

The Chakras 



The Hindu Tantric hatha yoga is synonymous with kundalini yoga. 
Its equivalent in Tantric-Buddhism is vajrarupa-guhya, "the mystery 
of the diamond-thunderbolt body (rupa)." At this level, sadhana 
focuses on the body, which constitutes its foundation and the place 
in which all spiritual operations take place. The presupposition of 
this kind of yoga is the analogical-magical correspondence between 
the microcosm and the macrocosm. All the powers that are actively 
manifested in the world are also actively present in the body. In a 
general sense, this idea is expressed in the Tantras by the saying 
"That which appears without only so appears because it exists 
within." 1 The Nirvana-Tantra declares: "Truly, each body is this 
universe (brahmananda)." This corresponds to another saying: "Lis- 
ten, o goddess [the text assumes Shiva is instructing Shakti]: wis- 
dom is to be found within the body. If one really discovers it, he 
will become omniscient." 

Obviously, the object of consideration here is not the physical 
body but rather the entire corporeity, and more precisely, the hu- 
man body, which is perceived as an instrument of superphysical 
forces. These forces operate in the physical body and sustain it. It 
is necessary at this point to refer to the theory of the three bodies - 



140 



The Occult Corporeity 

material, subtle, and causal bodies - which are not three distinct 
entities but rather three dimensions of the same entity. I have 
already said that the three bodies correspond to the three seats of 
consciousness. The material body corresponds to ordinary waking 
consciousness, in which one experiences the world in a physical 
and phenomenical way. This is the seat proper to the ordinary I. 
The other two bodies, or better, the other two dimensions of 
corporeity, ordinarily cannot be perceived. This is because in com- 
mon people's lives, the subtle plane corresponds to the dream state 
(svapnasthana), while the state that comes after that (the causal 
state) corresponds to the dreamless state or to deep sleep (sushupta- 
sthana.) A fourth state (kathurta or turiya), which is the uncondi- 
tioned, is the equivalent of a state of catalepsy, or of apparent 
death. Therefore, the deeper, transphysiological dimensions of hu- 
man corporeity are precluded to common men's waking conscious- 
ness. Neither can they experience the rajas state of corporeity as 
pure energy (subtle body), nor can they experience the sattva state 
as pure act (causal body), since both of those states are not limited 
to a single body. Ordinary men know and are subject to only the 
tamas state of corporeity. They live in what may be considered a 
particular, determined, static, and short-lived expression and mani- 
festation of life, as if they were automatic "precipitates" in an 
exhausted process; this expression is the material body, sthula-rupa. 
The subconscious, the unconscious, and various forms of reduced 
consciousness (e.g., the dream state) contain and conceal the mys- 
tery of transcendent corporeity, and also block the access to it. 

Hatha yoga techniques aim at removing this barrier and at 
revealing the spiritual corporeity to a clear and alert consciousness. 
This involves an expansion of consciousness itself, and its develop- 
ment into a superconsciousness that replaces those forms of im- 
paired and dulled consciousness. I would like to suggest, at this 
point, that some absurd psychoanalytical interpretations of yoga 
are circulated in the West by people who are extremely ignorant of 
even the most basic principles of yoga. According to these interpre- 
tations, yoga is supposed to induce hypnotic or trancelike states 
(like those experienced by a medium) that are below, rather than 
above, the level of ordinary waking consciousness. Exactly the 
opposite happens to be true. Western antiquity knew better, since 
Plutarch, for instance, wrote, "Not without divine inspiration has 
sleep spoken: it represents the lesser mysteries of death, since it is 
a preliminary initiation into death." Likewise, Synesius wrote, "Sleep 
discloses the path leading to a being's most complete fulfillment." 



141 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

I think it is absurd to attempt to establish a connection between 
yoga and modern psychoanalysis, even if we exclude Freud's school 
and consider instead the pseudospiritual views of C. G. Jung. Psy- 
choanalysis, as a matter of fact, operates on the mere plane of 
phenomenological psychology, and worse yet, it reifies or absolutizes 
the unconscious, presenting it as an impenetrable entity (Jung was 
very explicit about this). Therefore, according to psychoanalysis, 
the obstacle posited by an individual's consciousness is considered 
insurmountable. Various psychoanalytical schools can only specu- 
late on what the content of the unconscious is all about, since they 
do not admit the possibility of a direct and an immediate knowl- 
edge of the unconscious. These schools have variously assumed the 
content of the unconscious to be the heredity of the species; or the 
experiences during infancy (Freud actually referred to the sexual 
life of primitive people); or the mental structures found mainly in 
the hallucinations of neuropathological patients (Jung did not hesi- 
tate to draw aberrant analogies between Eastern mandalas and the 
figures appearing in such hallucinations); or the so-called arche- 
types, which are transferred from a metaphysical plane to the plane 
of irrationality, of bios, of life, and, of the "entreaties" on the ratio- 
nal and social ego. The dimension under scrutiny is dark, material- 
istic, and merely physiological. In yoga, on the contrary, the uncon- 
scious incorporates ontological principles and metaphysical reali- 
ties; 4 it may be resolved and known. In this case the unconscious 
gives way to a superconsciousness, and thus an authentic rein- 
tegration of the I takes place. Psychoanalysis reaches its most ab- 
surd conclusions when, in the person of Jung, it presumes to indi- 
cate the positive, "scientific" content of yoga and of related disci- 
plines. Psychoanalysis claims that these Eastern disciplines merely 
attempt to heal neurotic and sick individuals who are plagued and 
torn by the conflicts and by the divisions between the conscious 
and the unconscious. Yoga does not purport to heal sick, neurotic, 
and tormented individuals, however. On the contrary, it presup- 
poses a healthy, balanced person, to whom it will indicate the way 
to eventually overcome the human condition. 

After this brief though necessary clarification, let us return to 
our subject. That the ordinary I's consciousness is somehow exter- 
nal to the body, since its seat cannot be physically located, is the 
reason why the world, too, appears to be external to the I. Thus, 
when one crosses the boundaries of ordinary consciousness and 
enters into the subtle and causal planes, what ensues is a different 
relationship with the world as well as the discovery of its non- 



142 



The Occult Corporeity 

physical, nonphenomenological, or immaterial dimensions. 

The state in which the I rests upon and is immersed into the 
occult corporeity corresponds to the individual's consciousness of 
having lived so far only once - that is, now, in this body. This is the 
natural consequence of the outwardness of ordinary consciousness 
vis-a-vis the forces acting deep down inside one's being; these 
forces, though they may be expressed in the physical body, are 
superior to every single individuation. We may speak here of "the 
dangers to the immortal soul," in the sense that physical death may 
not turn out to be an indifferent event after all but, on the contrary, 
may constitute a serious crisis. When the I is immersed and sunken 
into an individuated form, it participates, to a certain extent, in the 
finite and ephemeral nature of that form. This is not to say that 
when the bodily foundation of an individual's life is dissolved after 
the death of the organism, the force that became attached to and 
involved in the bodily foundation will just fade away. More prop- 
erly, the continuity of consciousness has been broken. A real con- 
tinuity is conceivable only at the subtle and causal bodies' level, 
since these seats are superior to every single individuation and 
production and are not limited to only one life. 

At the level of the subtle body what surfaces is the "samsaric 
consciousness," or better, the awareness of being swept by a cur- 
rent in which a single existence merely represents a particular 
vortex. At the level of the causal body, consciousness extends ver- 
tically to multiple states of being, up to a point where there is no 
change or becoming. We may briefly recall that the East for a long 
time has known theories such as the theory of reincarnation, while 
more recently the West has professed almost exclusively the belief 
in the uniqueness of an individual's life. This fact, per se, is not a 
cause, but rather a consequence, or a barometric index, of the 
growing involution taking place during the dark age (Kali Yuga) to 
which I have often referred. Those Eastern theories still contain an 
echo of the primordial state in which ancient humanity once lived. 
In that state, the seat of the subtle body was not totally barred, and 
humanity still had a feeling of the "samsaric consciousness" con- 
nected to that seat. That knowledge was lost with the passing of 
time because the human body became increasingly physical. Natu- 
rally, as I have repeatedly stated, belief in reincarnation is folk- 
based and somewhat superstitious. Since this belief expounds the 
notion of a series of earthly incarnations of a single entity, it should 
be rejected as lacking solid, traditional foundations. 

Let us return to hatha yoga. Its main requirement is the devel- 



143 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

opment of the doctrine of total corporeity in its macrocosmic corres- 
pondences, which are expressed in terms of an elaborate and 
occult anatomy and physiology. The basic teaching is that the el- 
ementary principles and forces active in the world (bijas and devatas) 
are present in the body in a series of centers that repeat the order 
of the manifestation, namely, the hierarchy of the tattvas. These 
centers - chakras (wheels) or padmas (lotuses) - are imperceptible, 
and they elude any research conducted with the means of modern 
experimental science. These centers emanate currents of vital and 
luminous force that relate to organic and psychophysical functions: 
hence the correspondence between physical organs or systems and 
"heavenly" powers (semipure tattvas) or "divine" powers (pure tatt- 
vas). I will discuss the chakras at greater length in the following 
pages. 

There is a special relationship between organic systems and 
those states that characterize various bodies and seats of conscious- 
ness. According to yogic doctrine, these states, on a physical plane, 
have their corresponding "precipitates" in the cerebral system, ner- 
vous system, circulatory system, and skeletal system. These sys- 
tems correspond respectively to the ordinary waking state, dream 
state, sleep state, and catalexis, or state of apparent death (turiya). 

In those human forms in which it is possible to recognize the 
fundamental duality of Shiva and Shakti, Shiva represents the power 
that is the source of one's clear consciousness; conversely, Shakti 
represents prana, or vital breath, which envelops and permeates the 
entire organism as warmth does with water, oil with a sesame seed, 
fire with burning wood. The organism, therefore, appears to be 
interwoven with luminous forces and currents (vayus and nadis), 
which are constantly moving. 

Besides the Shakti element, found in the Shiva-Shakti dyad, the 
primary power, Parashakti, is also present in the organism in the 
form of kundalini. Kundalini is the root of a being's deepest life. Its 
seat in the human body is the muladhara-chakra. Muladhara means 
foundation, or fundamental support. According to yogic occult 
physiology, the plexus of the nadis (luminous arteries in which the 
basic life force, which permeates and lives in the occult corporeity, 
flows), is located in the muladhara-chakra. This basic center also 
corresponds to the last of the principles of the manifestation, namely, 
to the earth's tattva (prithivi-tattva); the earth symbolizes the state of 
outward, sensory, and material experiences. In this center of the 
invisible corporeity, the power at the basis of every manifestation 
is asleep. The term kundalini, or kundali, literally means "wrapped 



144 



The Occult Corporeity 

up," and it conveys the idea of sleep, or of a latent and unutilized 
potential. 

Kundalini's sleep has various meanings. The most conven- 
tional one is referred to the waking experience of a chaotic and 
dualistically minded world, in which the unity of power is not 
perceived. Thus it is said that samsara goes on and that we live in 
its snares for all the time kundalini is asleep. 

I have briefly mentioned that there seems to be a relationship 
between kundalini and sex; thus magical-sexual practices are sup- 
posed to cause a temporary arousal of the force. This relationship 
exists only in the context of a superphysical physiology, in the 
sense that Shakti, who rescinds the ties of yearning in the human 
condition, also manifests herself in that condition in the form of 
yearning. This is said to be her samsaric and somewhat degener- 
ated manifestation. In a highly symbolic Tantric icon Shakti is 
portrayed at the earth's level (the muladhara-chakra) as a snake 
wrapped around Shiva's phallus and resting its head on the phallus's 
orifice. We must refer to the metaphysical theory according to 
which animal or physical generation is an empty surrogate of spiri- 
tual generation. 5 The continuation of the species, through the use of 
sex perceived mainly as a generative power, represents a sort of 
ephemeral and earthly "eternity," or a facsimile of continuity, in 
the series of separated, mortal individuals that follow one another 
in time. This spatio-temporal continuity is a mere surrogate for the 
continuity that would be ensured by an ascending or vertical birth, 
or by a metaphysical integration that is well beyond the finite state 
of an individual who is conditioned by a specific physical body. 
Shiva's reproductive organ (phallus), is called svayambhu-linga, or 
"supportless" linga, since it has its principle within itself. The term 
alludes to the power proper to a different begetting, not physi- 
cal, but transcendent and anagogic; a begetting into a perfect, 
unblemished, incorruptible, and eternal life. Kundalini's head is 
blocking the opening of Shiva's phallus, thus preventing the ejacu- 
lation of semen, which is the principle of such an endogenesis. This 
clearly signifies that polarization, in the sense of sexual desire and 
procreative energy, prevents the force of the Shaivist svayam bhu- 
linga from becoming explicit and from assuming its proper form. 
Thus it is clear that one of the fundamental presuppositions of 
hatha yoga is the change of polarity operated by that energy which 
manifests itself in the form of passionate and procreative sexuality. 

At this yogic level, in which techniques aimed at obtaining a 
self-consuming arousal of the primordial force are no longer re- 



145 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

quired, the precept of sexual abstinence, or chastity, assumes a 
specific, operative meaning. It is not possible, in the case of ordi- 
nary human beings, to subscribe to the orientation, or to the 
concupiscence of Shakti's manifestation, and at the same time to go 
on to awaken kundalini, which is Shakti's realization in its proper 
and pure form. The term urdhavaretas, which is found in some 
Tantric and hatha yoga texts, means "to flow upward," and it 
alludes to a change of polarity. This idea is evident even in the 
Gnostic symbolism of the waters of the great Jordan River, which, 
when flowing downward, give place to animalistic procreation 
within the "circle of generation" (samsara); when flowing upward, 
they generate gods and a "race without a king." 6 

In relation to kundalini's awakening, I find it necessary to add 
a few more notions of occult physiology that are pertinent to the 
forms in which the dual principle manifests itself and acts in the 
human organism. Hatha yoga pays special attention to the two 
subtle and vital currents (vayus). These are prana (in the specific 
sense of the general term), which is related to breathing; and apana, 
which is related to man's secreting and discharging functions, for 
instance, the ejaculation of semen. Even though they have an an- 
tagonistic character, the two currents are interconnected. Prana 
tends to flow upward and to become detached from the body; 
however, as a falcon tied to a rope is prevented from flying to its 
destination, likewise prana is held back by apana and vice versa. As 
a ball forcefully thrown on the ground bounces back, this is what 
prana does to apana, which is oriented downward: hence an oscil- 
lation bearing ties with the existential restlessness and instability 
proper to finite beings, whose life, according to the Dhyanabindu- 
Upanishad, "is never steady." In some texts we find an interesting 
interpretation of the term hatha (as in hatha yoga). Ha is said to 
correspond to the prana current; tha to the apana current. The 
whole word (ha + tha) reveals the "secret of this type of yoga," 
namely, the unification of the two currents. A secret yogic proce- 
dure called mulabhanda consists in inverting the natural direction of 
the two currents, that is, in directing prana downward and apana 
upward. "Through mulabhanda, prana and apana, nada and bindu 
join together and the perfection of yoga is finally achieved." Obvi- 
ously such practices presuppose mastery over the subtle currents of 
the organism, and for this purpose a teacher's (guru's) guidance is 
necessary. 

More relevance is given in yoga to the dual correspondence of 
the subtle organism, which is found in the existence of two main 



146 



The Occult Corporeity 

opposite arteries called the pingala and the ida. The ida has a lunar 
character and corresponds to the moon; it is connected to the Shaktic 
principle. The pingala has a solar character and corresponds to the 
sun; is connected to the Shaivist principle. These arteries are be- 
lieved to have colors, not in a real, physical sense, but rather in 
reference to the character of the psychic perception of various 
impressions. The ida is pale and ethereal, slightly pink, like the 
color of the almond flower. The pingala instead is bright red. They 
both depart from the muladhara-chakra, which is the chakra located 
where the sacrum joins the coccyx. They are intertwined like a 
spiraling serpent around the spine, touching five times along the 
axis of the spine, the last spot being at the level of the eyebrows, 
where, as in the portraits of various divinities, we find the so-called 
urna, the frontal stone that in Western mythology represents the 
Cyclops's eye and in Eastern mythology represents Shiva's third 
eye. They are believed to be related to the two lateral cords, left and 

right, that depend on the sympathetic nervous system, and also 
with alternating breathing from both nostrils (the yogins believe 
that we breath with one nostril and then with the other). The ida 
starts from the right testicle and terminates in the left nostril, while 
the pingala starts from the left testicle and terminates in the right 
nostril. According to the hamsah formulation of the vital principle 
(prana), the ida is associated with sah, or inspiration; the pingala, 
instead, is associated with ham, or expiration. 

Interestingly enough, the duality of the ida and pingala is 
related to temporality (kala), since the two currents measure the 
rhythm of the alternation of inspiration and expiration, which is 
typical of beings who live in time. Thus, when this duality is 
removed, because the pingala and ida are consumed in the one 
force that runs across the sushumna, time itself is consumed, and 

o 

the temporal condition is suspended. 

The main way to light the fire that awakens kundalini consists 
in the suspension of the pingala's and ida's movement and in their 
conjunction. We might say that the conjunction of these two cur- 
rents, one with a Shaivist-solar character, the other with a Shaktic- 
lunar character, acts as a sexual intercourse between man and 
woman (who represent respectively Shiva and Shakti). The suspen- 
sion of the pingala and ida, obtained through pranayama, which is 
the control and suspension of the vital breath, arouses a fluid 
vortex that awakens kundalini. Once this elementary force is awak- 
ened, it absorbs and carries along with it all the other currents. It 
eventually goes beyond the barrier and ascends from the muladhara- 



147 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

chakra along the spinal cord, around which, in ordinary life, the 
pingala and ida are intertwined. (The pattern of the three directions 
reproduces Hermes' caduceus, with two serpents wrapped around 
the central rod). The path along this axis is called the sushumna. 
What is usually called "brahman's threshold" (brahmadvara) is now 
crossed. This threshold is closed during the samsaric existential 
state, just as the opening of Shiva's phallus is symbolically closed 
in the muladhar a- chakra. In its innermost part, the sushumna current 
is called vajrini-nadi, which signifies the nature of a diamond-thun- 
derbolt. In even deeper recesses, it is called chitrini-nadi, since "it is 
radiating with the splendor of the sacred syllable, which generates 
pure knowledge." The sushumna has also been called "Great Path," 
"Regal Path," "Middle Path," and it has been assimilated to the 
Tree of Life 9 - life in the eminent sense of immortal life. 

It is claimed that after the obstacle has been swept away, the no 
longer dualistic elementary force that consumes the pingala and the 
ida finally pours into the sushumna and "lights the fire of death." 10 
The texts used the term death to describe the traumatic sensation a 
man experiences at the peak of the magical intercourse with a 
woman. In both cases it is an experience of transcendence, the 
breaking through ordinary consciousness, and what ordinary people 
experience as death. The correspondence between death and initia- 
tion (initiation = active death) has always been acknowledged: we 
can find specific testimonies concerning it in Western antiquity. 
This correspondence is not allegorical but real: it refers to an onto- 
logical change of state within the hierarchy of various states of 
being. A further correspondence should be acknowledged: when 
the sushumna is understood as the "Middle Path" (madhyamarga), it 
corresponds to the direction taken by those who, after death, turn 
toward the unconditioned. All the lateral paths departing from the 
axis like branches from a tree trunk are believed to lead to other 
conditioned states of existence. 

The abovementioned expansion of consciousness signifies the 
overcoming of the limitation represented by the waking state, which 
is conditioned by the physical body. This limitation prevents the 
perception of the superphysical dimensions of corporeity as well as 
the occupation of the corresponding seats. Thus Tantric hatha yoga 
does not merely consist in awakening kundalini. This energy, in 
fact, becomes a helpful means leading to the realization of the 
powers hidden in one's body; of the chakras, or occult centers; and 
of their corresponding forces and principles in the macrocosm. This 
process, therefore, acquires a transcendent dimension and meaning. 
Every power in the body becomes known and controlled, in a 

148 



The Occult Corporeity 

backward progression in respect to Shakti's cosmic manifestation, 
until the principle is finally reached. 

The following are the general presuppositions of this type of 
yoga: (1) one must be able to overcome the crisis induced by 
kundalini's awakening, and not be swept away; (2) one must unite 
with kundalini; (3) kundalini must be led and guided through the 
various chakras. This means that a lucid, firm control must be 
maintained even in the supernatural dimension and in the 
transphysical states of consciousness. I must emphasize again that 
if the basic force, or "serpent power," as it has been called, awakens 
and starts acting randomly, this is still not considered enough. The 
force must be controlled. Here we find the symbolism of a widow 
(Shakti in a state of release) who awaits her mate. 

There is another important aspect to be considered. When deal- 
ing with Tantric cosmology, I referred to a descending phase, 
pravritti-marga, that corresponds to the purely emanative phase of 
the manifestation, taking place under the aegis of Shakti, who is 
free of bonds, extroverted, and who finds her limitation at the level 
of the earth. The next phase, nirvritti-marga, involves the 
"reabsorption" (laya) of this Shakti, in terms of a reunion with 
Shiva. In kundalini yoga, also called laya yoga, this process seems to 
take place sub specie interioritatis. Kundalini "awakens" various 
chakras, but this, per se, is not enough, and we should not consider 
only the awakening and the attainment of spiritual corporeity. Each 
of the first six chakras is also seen as the seat of a god and of his 
shakti. Their awakening is achieved though their sexual union 
(which clearly corresponds to the gradual removal of the dualistic 
law of may a- shakti). This means that the yogic process involves the 
transformation of the Shaktic element into Shiva. Likewise, in the 
ascending phase of the manifestation, or to be precise, at its peak, 
which corresponds to the seventh chakra, a reference is made to the 
supreme union of Shiva and Shakti, at a transcendental level. When 
Tantric Buddhism talks about "allowing various buddhas to enter 
into the body's chakras" (this is the equivalent of a mating between 
a god and a goddess in each of these chakras), it obviously agrees 
with the Tantric Hindu perspective, since a buddha corresponds to 
the Shaivist luminous element. In Vajrayana the realization of the 
chakras corresponds to supernatural experiences and to the cre- 
ation of various limbs of the so-called diamond body (vajra-rupa). 

Let us proceed now to learn about the various chakras. My 
main source will be two short treatises, the Shatchakra-Nirupana 
and the Padukapanchaka, which were translated into English by 
Arthur Avalon in his book The Serpent Power. We find in Avalon's 

149 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

text a clarification of all the elements and symbols attributed by the 
two treatises to various chakras, and especially to Hindu gods. 
Unfortunately I must follow the stereotypical and somewhat overly 
schematic description given by the texts. 

The seven chakras are called muladhara, svadhishthana, manipura, 
anahata, vishuddha, ajna, and sahasrara. The first five correspond to 
the "great elements" (tattvas) - earth, water, fire, air, and ether. The 
sixth chakra, ajna, corresponds to the "inner organ" and to the 
individuating intellectual powers up to and including buddhi. The 
tattvas that occupy a higher place on the hierarchy correspond to 
the space between the ajna-chakra and sahasrara- chakra, which is 
located at the top of the head. This spot corresponds to the specific 
and supreme unity and, in mythological accounts, to the peak of 
Mount Kailasa, the dwelling place of Shiva, who is called "the Lord 
of the Mountain." As I have said, these centers are located along the 
spinal cord and its extension. They are portrayed as lotus flowers; 
each of them has a specific number of petals, which correspond to 
the "causal letters" (matrika) and to the invisible forces of the natura 
naturans. These forces are found united in various ways in the 
human spiritual corporeity and are manifested as shaping forces 
and as pranic currents irradiating from each chakra. The number of 
petals corresponds to the number of these currents. Since, following 
this way, the connection of the physical body parts is finally 
achieved, there seems to be an analogy between the chakras and the 
plexuses found in the human organism. In addition to the letters, a 
mantra is associated with each chakra, which has a relation with 
the prevailing power in it. This mantra may be used in the process 
of awakening. What follows is a summary of the analytical descrip- 
tion found in the texts. 



MULADHARA-CHAKRA 

Corresponding to the sacral-coccygeal plexus, the muladhara- chakra 
is located at the base of the spinal cord (at the tip of the filum 
terminale), between the anus and the genitals. It has four petals, 
corresponding to the Sanskrit letters va, sha, ca, and sa. Its color is 
yellow. Its mandala is a square, which in turn is the earth's mandala. 
The earth is the tattva corresponding to this chakra. Its mantra is 
LAM. This chakra is related to (1) the cohesiveness of physical mat- 
ter; (2) the tanmatra of smell and its corresponding organ; (3) apana, 
or "down-breath"; and (4) the human skeleton. 

This chakra is the seat of the "god of the earth," or of the 
demiurge (Brahma), and of his Shakti, Dakini. The elephant on 

150 



The Occult Corporeity 

which the mantra LAM is sometimes inscribed represents the bulki- 
ness, weight, and stasis characterizing the manifestations of the 
earth's tattva. In the middle of the chakra one finds an inverted 
triangle, the symbol of the Shakti principle. Inside the triangle one 
finds the svayambhu-linga, on which the mantra of desire, KLM, is 
written in red. According to a text: "Within it [the triangle] the self- 
subsisting reality appears in the form of a linga [phallus]." This 
means that the self-subsisting power, in this context, takes the form 
of a generating power. Inside the triangle one may also find a 
dormant kundalini, wrapped around the linga with three and a half 
coils. This serpent obstructs, with its head, "brahman's threshold" 
and the access to the sushumna, which departs from this chakra's 
center. 

Various forms of the affective and emotional life of ordinary 
people are associated with each chakra. The following are asso- 
ciated with the muladhar a- chakra: greed (lobha), false knowledge, credu- 
lity, delusions, and indulgence in coarse and obtuse material 
pleasures. The force that induces sleep is also ascribed to this chakra. 

SVADHISHTHANA-CHAKRA 

Corresponding to the prostatic plexus, the svadhisthana- chakra is 
located at the base of the genitals. It has six petals, corresponding 
to the letters ba, bha, ma, ya, ra, and la. Its color is white. Its mandala 
is a crescent moon, the symbol of the water tattva, which corre- 
sponds to this chakra. Its mantra is VAM. This chakra is related to (1) 
the contracting force of physical matter; (2) the tanmatra of taste and 
its corresponding organ; (3) the gripping organs (especially the 
hands); (4) the genital and ejaculative functions of the vital force; 
and (5) the adipose tissues. 

This chakra is the seat of Vishnu, who represents the preserv- 
ing aspect of the godhead, and of his Shakti, Rakini. The god is 
represented as having four arms, holding respectively a shell, a 
disk, a lotus, and a mace. The goddess, too, is portrayed with four 
arms; her hands hold a trident, a lotus, a drum, and a spear. She has 
three eyes, and her countenance is terrifying. The name of this 
chakra means (Shakti's) "own-base center." On the other hand, the 
mantra VAM is said to be "immaculate and as bright as the moon in 
an autumn night." This antithesis refers to the transformation, tak- 
ing place beyond the earth, of the unleashed power, which is con- 
nected to the humid principle (the Hermetic passage from the 
"lower-level waters" to the "heavenly waters"). 

The correspondences on the affective plane are sexual desire, 

151 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

tiredness, aversion, shame, and languor. The force that causes thirst 
in an ordinary person is ascribed to this chakra. 

MANIPURA-CHAKRA 

Corresponding to the hypogastric plexus, the manipur a- chakra is 
located at the base of the lumbar region, at the level below the 
navel. It has ten petals, corresponding to the letters da, dha, na, ta, 
tha, da, na, pa, and pha. 11 Its color is red. Its mandala is a triangle 
with swastikas at its angles, which represent the fire tattva, which 
corresponds to this chakra. Its mantra is RAM. This chakra is related 
to (1) the expanding force of matter; (2) the tanmatra of sight (color 
and form) and its corresponding organ; (3) the function of defeca- 
tion; (4) the assimilating and digestive function of the vital force; 
and (5) the flesh and muscles. Tejas, or brilliance, is often associated 
with this chakra. 

Manipura literally means "jeweled city." It is conceived as a 
"red area of a flame," or as the seat of Rudra (Shiva's equivalent) 
or as the dissolutive and consuming manifestation of the cosmic 
power. The god, according to popular iconography, is covered with 
the ashes collected from the material consumed by the fire; he is 
portrayed in vara-mudra and in abhaya-mudra, the double gesture 
that dispenses favors and dissipates fear. He is portrayed in the 
company of Lakini, his Shakti, who has three heads and three eyes, 
and who holds a thunderbolt and a sword in her hands. These 
images induce us to think that in this chakra the yogic process 
provokes a combustion. The force of desire, which in the previous 
chakra existed in a liquid state, is here consumed in a burning, 
shining substance that is all-pervasive. 

The corresponding affective forces are anger (krodha), tear, as- 
tonishment, violence, and pride. The force that manifests itself in an 
ordinary person as hunger is associated with this chakra. 

ANAHATA-CHAKRA 

Corresponding to the cardiac plexus, the anahata- chakra is located at 
the level of the heart. It has twelve petals, corresponding to the 
letters ka, kha, ga, gha, na, ca, cha, ja, jha, jna, ta, and tha. Its color is 
dark gray. According to a Vedantic interpretation, gray is the color 
of smoke engulfing a living being's atman (jivatma) prior to his 
enlightenment. The Upanishads claim that the atman is located in 
the deepest recesses of the heart, which is believed to be the seat of 



152 



The Occult Corporeity 

the divine as well as the center of one's personality. Its mandala is 
a six-point star, formed by two inverted triangles in perfect equilib- 
rium. This is also the symbol of the air tattva, which corresponds to 
this chakra. Its mantra is YAM. This chakra is related to (1) move- 
ment in physical reality; (2) the tanmatra of touch and its corre- 
sponding organ (skin); (3) the male sexual organ; (4) the swallow- 
ing and digestive functions of the vital force; and (5) the blood 
system. 

This is the seat of the god Isha, the "Lord," who is the mani- 
festation of the primordial power in the form of a personal god (this 
manifestation is reflected in the atma as the principle of the 
individual's personality). This god, too, is portrayed in the double 
gesture of driving away fear and of granting favors, and so is 
Kakini, his Shakti, "filled with the sweet nectar of immortality." 
The name of this chakra derives from the fact that in it, the yogins 
are able to perceive the "unstruck sound," which is associated with 
"the life stream in the jiva." The texts offer some further images. 
Inside the hexagonal star, there is, just as in the muladhara- chakra, an 
inverted triangle, representing the goddess's yoni (sexual organ). 
This triangle too contains Shiva's phallus, which is a golden vana- 
linga. On the linga we find inscribed the symbol of the moon, which 
is dominated by the bindu, the one and simple dot. Under the linga 
we find an image of the vital principle (hamsah), which in this 
context assumes the meaning of the superpersonal I, aptly de- 
scribed in the Bhagavad-Gita as "a still flame in a windless place." 
In this description, it is clear that the general views contained in the 
Upanishads about the heart as the center of the human being and 
as the seat of the atma mingle with specifically Tantric views. 

The correspondences on the affective plane are hope, anxiety, 
apprehension, doubt, remorse, and hesitation. The mantra YAM is 
inscribed on a black antelope, which symbolizes the immaterial 
speed of the wind. 

VISHUDDHA-CHAKRA 

Corresponding to the larynx, the vishuddha-chakra is located on the 
axis of the spinal cord, at the level of the throat, in the place in 
which the spinal cord becomes the medulla oblongata. It has six- 
teen petals, which correspond to sixteen letters of the Sanskrit 
alphabet. Its color is bright, shining white. Its mandala is a circle, 
which symbolizes ether, to which it corresponds. Its mantra is HAM. 
It is related to (1) the expanding force of physical reality; (2) the 



153 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

tanmatra of sound and the sense of hearing; (3) the expression of 
vital energy; (4) the mouth; and (5) the skin. 

In this center, the androgynous god Sadashiva's body is por- 
trayed half white as snow (in other descriptions it is of a silver 
color) and half golden. He is carried by an animal that is half lion 
and half bull. The -shiva suffix of this god's name alludes to the 
"eternal being," and therefore to an extrasamsaric condition. Next 
to this god is his Shakti, Sakini, who is white and cold. It is said 
that her form is that of a "light unto herself." This signifies that, 
at this level, Shiva's quality has been transfused into Shakti. The 
region of this chakra is described as a lunar and ethereal region 
(the ethereal light that turns the night into day) and as the threshold 
of the "Great Liberation." It has been said that while dwelling in 
it, atma sees itself in everything and dominates the three dimensions 
of time (past, present, and future). The mantra HAM, in this chakra's 
representations, is carried by a white elephant. This may represent 
the transformation of what in the muladhar a- chakra characterizes 
the earth tattva, namely, ether (akasha), understood in terms of spa- 
tial consciousness, as opposed to material nontransparent density. 

The correspondences on the affective plane are affection, sad- 
ness, respect, devotion, happiness, regret, and relationships. 

AJNA-CHAKRA 

Corresponding to the cavernous plexus, the ajna-chakra is located in 
the middle of the head, at the level of the eyebrows. It has two 
petals, which correspond to the letters ha and ksha. Its color is a 
dazzling white blaze. Its mantra is AUM. It is related to (1) the 
cerebellum; (2) the marrow; (3) "the inner organ," which includes 
buddhi, manas, and ahamkara; and (4) sukshma-prakriti, which on a 
macrocosmic level is the root of all the powers of nature considered 
in its subtle dimension. 

Inside this chakra's inverted triangle the goddess Hakini, who 
looks like Kali, is represented. She is Shiva's bride at the level of his 
highest manifestation (Paramshiva). Hakini's complexion is white, 
and she appears intoxicated by the "ambrosia," or nectar of immor- 
tality. She has six faces and six arms. Two of her hands are repeat- 
ing the mudras that exorcise fears and dispense favors, while the 
other hands are holding symbolic objects: a rosary, a skull, a small 
drum, and a book. Ajna-chakra literally means "command wheel." It 
is located in the same place as the urna, the frontal stone that in 
Hindu iconography alludes to the third eye, or to Shiva's eye. This 
eye acts as a thunderbolt (vajra). The texts attribute to it a cyclical or 

154 



The Occult Corporeity 

"cyclopic" transcendent vision. An analogous meaning is conveyed 
in the representation of an inverted triangle that contains a linga in 
the shape of a thunderbolt or of a diamond; this triangle symbolizes 
the goddess and the yoni, the female sexual organ. Shiva's virility 
penetrates Shakti in the form of vajra, the thunderbolt force, and it 
manifests itself in every magical command. Its counterpart is the 
portrayal of the "inner spirit" (antaratma), which shines like a flame 
right above the linga (in this context called itara-linga); in its light 
"everything that is included in the manifestation" 14 becomes clearly 
visible. There is more to this symbolism. Above the inverted tri- 
angle we find the moon surmounted by the bindu. In the bindu, 
according to a commentary, there is "an infinite space, shining with 
the splendor of countless suns." 1 This region is the dwelling place 
of the "Lord who is beyond peacefulness" (this alludes to a state 
higher than the mere "ether of consciousness"), whose body is made 
of lightning. This is the threshold of the pure tattvas. 



MANAS-CHAKRA AND SOMA-CHAKRA 

The Tantric texts mention two minor centers located in the proxim- 
ity of the ajna-chakra. The first is called manas-chakra and has six 
petals. As the name implies, it is related to the mental aspect of the 
jiva; to the formation and representation of ideas, which are con- 
nected to the afferent sensory system; and to the imaginative fac- 
ulty, which is manifested even in dreams and in hallucinations. As 
far as this chakra's awakening is concerned, if the yogic process has 
not unfolded properly, there is the danger of incurring hallucina- 
tions and of experiencing a chaotic clairvoyance. 

The second minor center is called soma-chakra. It has sixteen 
petals and is located in the middle of the brain, above the minor 
center I have just described. The descriptions of its functions are 
not very accurate. This center is believed to relate to some forms of 
creative idealizations and to anything related to a thought process 
unfolding in a rigorously logical fashion. Self-control is associated 
with this chakra, as are various feelings and dispositions of the 
jiva's ordinary life, such as compassion, generosity, renunciation, 
determination, and seriousness. 



THE SEVEN FORMS OF THE CAUSAL BODY 

In the middle of the forehead there is a twelve-petaled white lotus, 
which is associated with the pure tattvas. According to popular 
symbolism, this is not really a true chakra, but rather a region that 

155 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

includes (1) the Great Goddess's inverted triangle, which is here 
called a-ka-tha. These are three Sanskrit letters corresponding to the 
three sides of the triangle. They symbolize the elements of the triad 
included in the parabindu, which is the transcendental unity (sun, 
moon, fire, and other related triads are also employed); (2) a space 
made of sound, in which the parabindu becomes the primordial 
motion, believed to be a sound; (3) "the area surrounding the altar" 
(the "Eternal Master," who is gigantic, imposing, and "looking like a 
silver mountain," 16 sits on this altar "of the color of bright red gems"); 
and (4) hamsah in its supreme and "eternal" expression. The latter is 
the equivalent of the union between Shiva (ham) and Shakti (sah), 
which constitutes the first tattva on the transcendent hierarchy. 

This region is called "residence without foundations" and indi- 
cates the self-subsisting power that characterizes the pure tattvas. 
The texts suggest that here the yogins realize the seven forms of the 
causal body, which correspond to the seven stages of pure power 
(Shiva- Shakti, nada, bindu, tribindu, sattva, rajas, tamas). If such a 
body receives the name of karanavantara-karira (intermediate and 
successive causal body), this must be understood in relation to the 
immobile cause of which it represents the primordial manifestation, 
made of pure act. In this region, too, we find the double mudra of 
dissipating fear and granting favors. 

SAHASRARA-CHAKRA 

Located on the head, above the fontanel, the sahasrara-chakra is 
called the "thousand-petaled lotus," but this number does not cor- 
respond to the actual pranic currents, as was the case in the other 
chakras; this number, rather, signifies greatness. According to some, 
since the number one thousand equals fifty multiplied by twenty, 
it symbolizes the multiplication or further power of the fifty letters 
of the Sanskrit alphabet. It is also believed that these letters, vari- 
ously distributed in the six lower chakras, are gathered in the 
sahasrara-chakra. In this chakra we find again the symbol of the 
great Shakti's inverted triangle. Its counterpart this time is no longer 
a linga but rather the "supreme dot" (parabindu), understood in the 
terms of emptiness (shunya). Emptiness symbolizes the uncondi- 
tioned and the immaterial simplicity of a pure transcendent enlight- 
enment, in which the limitations of every conditioned state have 
been removed. "Fullness," on the contrary, signifies the whole of 
the tattvas in their immanent aspect, which is connected to the 
manifestation and variously articulated. In the sahasrara-chakra, Shakti 



156 



The Occult Corporeity 

finally becomes, without any residual, chidrupini. She takes the 
form of Shiva, and therefore becomes resolved and freed. She be- 
comes one with her "bridegroom's body," to form a union higher 
than either one. This union corresponds to Vajrayana's mahasukha- 
kaya, which is the state beyond the unilaterally conceived transcen- 
dent nirvana. 

The sahasrara-chakra is called a chakra only for practical pur- 
poses. In reality it is not a "center" like the others. It is situated 
outside the body, in the spot where the axial line goes beyond the 
cranium. Since the body corresponds to the universe, the sahasrara- 
chakra, or the dimension of transcendence that is beyond the uni- 
verse, is analogically located above the head. 

The description of the chakras given in the Tantras is multifac- 
eted. First of all, what has been considered is the correspondence of 
the chakras with various plexuses, functions, and forces of the 
human organism. This means that in these plexuses, functions, and 
forces, there are dormant forms of consciousness, which are associ- 
ated with various gods presiding over bodily activities. Second, the 
first five chakras are believed to correspond to as many elements 
(tattvas). This correspondence may constitute a foundation for the 
knowledge or the experience of them, simply by focusing dhyana 
or samyama on any given chakra. 

Most likely, the mantras associated with each chakra are given 
to the apprentice for practical purposes: the awakening of the chakras 
may be facilitated by the use of the mantra that apppears in its 
visualization. 

As far as the various divinities associated with each chakra are 
concerned, it may well be said that the contemplation of them and 
of their attributes may prepare the way for the awakening. This is 
obviously contingent on the quality of the contemplation to be 
found in the worshiper of a particular deity. The opposite process 
may also take place: if a god that was realized in dhyana is instru- 
mental in a chakra's awakening, this awakening, in turn, may be 
helpful to "demythologize" this god and to enable the apprentice to 
see his essence as a corresponding formless state, which is proper 
to initiatory knowledge. 

The seven chakras reproduce the Septenary, or the Ebdomades, 
spoken of in several Mysteriosophic and initiatory traditions. These 
traditions mention a planetary hierarchy; heavenly journeys; the 
ascent through seven spheres; seven levels, or degrees, of initiation 
(e.g., Mithra's mysteries); and alchemical transformations of "prime 



157 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

matter," 17 associated with the planets. All of these things symbolize 
experiences analogous to the ones found in hatha yoga (ascent 
through the chakras). As I have said before, these experiences should 
not be "psychologized," but rather should be understood in terms 
of a cosmic expansion of consciousness. In the course of the ascent 
along sushumna, one takes on the bodies of various gods and claims 
possession of seats (lokas) beyond the phenomenal world, called 
bhur-loka, bhuvar-loka, svar-loka, jana-loka, tapar-loka, and mahar-loka. 
Generally speaking, a particular type of knowledge typical of 
the corresponding tattva is attributed to each awakened chakra. For 
instance, the spheres or worlds of fire, water, air, and ether, which 
are the first tattvas beyond the earth, are considered to be transfor- 
mations of the experiences of nature and also to be living beings, 
which have a correspondence with the tattva manifested in it. Thus, 
the lower chakras are supposed to provide knowledge of the laws 
and of the forces acting in the elementary aspects of nature. The 
chakra located at the solar plexus confers the knowledge of the 
character and of the dispositions of human beings. The chakras at 
the heart and at the larynx allow the apprentice to detect the 
feelings and thoughts of other people. This obviously presupposes 
the acquired capability of relocating one's consciousness to various 
areas of the subtle body. From a magical point of view, the power 
over an element that a person may acquire is also supposed to 
confer dominion over the manifestations of that element in the 
external world, because of the substantial and ontological unity of 
the principles involved. 

It would be interesting to look for the correspondence between 
the Tantric view of kundalini and the teachings and symbols of 
other traditions, but this would take us too far off. I will only 
suggest here that the ureus, the serpent that in Egyptian art is worn 

1 o 

by the king as a diadem, probably symbolizes the same life force. 
Also, when the Hermetists spoke of the "philosopher's basilisk," 
which as a thunderbolt burns every "imperfect metal," or of the 
"Dry Way," we may probably see in these symbols a reference to 
kundalini's awakening. Other correspondences could be found con- 
cerning the basic center or muladhar a- chakra 19 in both the East and 
the West. 



158 



XI 



TECHNIQUES EMPLOYED 
TO AWAKEN THE 
SERPENT POWER 



Yoga's sadhana is mainly based on breath and on breath control 
(pranayama). Pranayama is far from being a prerogative of Tantrism 
alone. It is also found in classical yoga. Patanjali describes it as "the 
cutting off of the flow of inhalation and exhalation after assuming 
a steady and comfortable position." 1 A real suspension of breath 
(viccheda) takes place only in the last stages of the yogic practice, 
which even in subsequent stages is referred to as pranayama. In 
any event, breath control and its suspension can be used for very 
different purposes. Tantric yoga employs pranayama in order to 
awaken kundalini, while dhyana yoga uses it to regulate and to 
suspend the flow of mental activities. 

This does not prevent hatha yoga from employing breath sus- 
pension in preliminary practices. Thus pranayama may be associ- 
ated with procedures through which one attempts to elevate con- 
sciousness to the seats that correspond to the body's deepest levels 
of corporeity. The premise here consists in a relationship between 
various breathing rhythms and those seats. The most immediate 
factor is breath according to a rhythm proper to waking conscious- 
ness, which is essentially connected to mental activities. In this 
form, breathing has two characteristics. First, it is as arrhythmic 



159 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

and unmethodical as the mental and the emotional life of ordinary 
people. Second, there is a disproportion between the inspiratory 
and the expiratory phases, since their duration usually varies. 

The starting point of these practices consists in the "undertak- 
ing of prana's seat," which is also referred to as "riding the hamsah 
bird." The word hamsah refers to the vital principle in its particular 
relationship with breath and with prana (the two syllables of the 
word refer to inhaling and exhaling, respectively). The representa- 
tion of hamsah as a bird alludes to the volatile and unstable rhythm 
of ordinary breathing, which comes in and goes out countless times, 
day and night, and to the flighty and elusive nature of the vital 
principle present in humankind. It is said that yoga's power is 
capable of transforming hamsah's nature and of overcoming its 
birdlike mobility by rendering it non-terrestrial. 

I have previously explained that prana is not ordinary breath- 
ing, but breathing considered in its subtle and living dimension. 
This essential point is often forgotten in the Western popularization 
of yoga, in which pranayama is often misrepresented as a sort of 
breathing exercise (that yoga may prove beneficial in ordinary life 
even in this form does not invalidate my contention). The texts 
describe the dematerialization, internalization, and essential func- 
tion of breath that lead to an experience of prana. The texts' refer- 
ence to a specific prana aimed at various parts of the body clearly 
indicates that they do not employ the term in its ordinary sense. 

Thus the expression "riding the hamsah bird" refers to the 
transformation of ordinary breath into living breath. The first step 
of the pranayama process consists in assuming a different breathing 
rhythm, which is increasingly calm, even, deep, and slow, as well 
as different from the rhythm characterizing the waking state. This 
technique is used to break down the blocked doors of the subcon- 
scious. The texts suggest the choice, first and foremost, of the 
rhythm 2t-t-2t, which comprises an inhalation (puraka) lasting, for 
example, six seconds; a retention of breath (kumbhaka) lasting half 
that time (e.g., for three seconds); and finally, an expiration (rechaka) 
lasting six seconds, followed by a three-second abstention from 
breath, and so on. Time may be measured by the count of one's 
heartbeats or by the mental recitation of a mantra. Little by little, 
the rhythm becomes slower, effortless, simply through a mental 
action. Every single phase or degree in this progression should be 
sufficiently consolidated, so that the apprentice may be able to 
achieve it at will, and to adopt it as natural rhythm, only a few 
minutes into the practice. In this way, the apprentice does not need 



160 



Techniques Employed to Awaken the Serpent Power 

to avert his attention from the direction and the control of what 
constitutes pranayama's physical aspect. 

When the exercise is performed in the proper way, it facilitates 
the shift of the apprentice's consciousness seat. This shift is referred 
to as "to reenter" or "to move into an inner state." Without exag- 
gerations, it is said that making the inspiration and expiration even 
through the 2t-t-2t rhythm allows one to drink from the source of 
immortality, which is located in the "sun." In any event, the effect 
of the first change of state brought about by pranayama consists in 
feeling a calm and solar presence in one's life. We can now begin 
to understand why this transformation, or descent, is also said to be 
a reentering. In the seat that in the common person is that of 
dissipation in sleep and in torpor, the values are inverted. The seat 
reveals itself to be that of "being within oneself," in a state of 
perfect calm and lucidity, compared to which waking conscious- 
ness is a "being outside oneself," in a world of distractions and of 
restlessness. 

More specifically, moving into the heart's seat either implies or 
occasions (the difference depends on the methods employed) the 
suspension (or the "slaying") of manas, which is the organ respon- 
sible for discursive thought, the creation of ideas, and mental asso- 
ciations, which are all "psychological" functions. "To slay manas in 
one's heart" is a recurrent theme in the Upanishads. In the Maitri- 
Upanishad we read: "So long the mind [manas] should be confined, 
till in the heart it meets its end. That is both knowledge and release! 
All else is but a string of words!" 4 And also: "Holding his body 
steady with the three upper parts erect, and causing the senses with 
the mind to enter into the heart, a wise man with the Brahma-boat 
should cross over all the fear-bringing streams [of samsara]." 5 The 
psychological states are the following: What first takes place is the 
occurrence of clear thoughts interconnected by activities produced 
by the I, which intervenes and arranges them in different patterns. 
Second, we have the arising of the spontaneous and unintentional 
associations of ideas, which takes place in a state of semiconscious- 
ness. Third, we have a cessation of mentally "spoken" thoughts and a 
decrease in mental images, which become progressively sporadic and 
rare. Following these stages, an ordinary person's manas is con- 
sumed in sleep. A yogin's manas, instead, is replaced with states 
leading to superconsciousness, which is proper to the heart's chakra. 

Further stages of pranayama involve an increasingly slower 
rhythm of breathing, until breath ceases. There is an area in which 
all of this is supposed to take place. In this area, which extends 



161 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

beyond the cardiac region in the direction of the muladhara-chakra, 
some further changes of state are believed to occur. If one is able to 
organically become part of this development and to carry it further, 
he would eventually come across the state that corresponds, on the 
physical plane, to the skeleton. In this state (the "earth" of the 
human body), breathing stops and consciousness appears as scorch- 
ing and abyssal heat. Some texts talk about the apparition of a 
skeleton, "as wide as the universe," consisting of a white thunder- 
bolt. The terminal point is self-centeredness, or a sense of an abso- 
lute "I AM," or "I," which is the residue of hamsah or of prana, 
which has now become a self-consuming force. Upon the overcom- 
ing of this limitation, kundalini awakens and enters into the 
sushumna. 

This process will unfold naturally, through a series of various 
degrees, after the seat of prana has been occupied, and after the 
hamsah bird has been firmly restrained. The intensity of concentra- 
tion on a specific central, detached spot, made of light, could facili- 
tate the passage from one phase to the other. At a certain moment 
the change in the breath's rhythm and its suspension would turn 
from cause into effect, almost in the sense of a physical reflex of an 
absolute stillness and unity, which are realized inwardly. This is 
one aspect of the process. Another aspect corresponds to the Taoist 
symbol of a dragon that takes to flight into ether, as well as to 
Mithras, who grabs the bull by the horns and begins to ride on it. 
The animal begins to run widely, but Mithras does not let go his 

o 

grip, and when the bull, exhausted, comes to a halt, he slays it. 
This last phase could correspond to the aforesaid breaking point, 
and also to the symbol of Phineus's spear-thrust, which I have 
associated with the initiatory Tantric sexual practices. If the pro- 
cess, in this second aspect, is interpreted in terms of pranayama, it 
is believed to consist in the slowing down of normal breathing, 
which is spontaneous, without any spiritual intervention, while the 
apprentice remains self-aware during the subtle intensification of 
power. If left "unchanged," breathing would change rhythm by 
itself, as in the case of people who become numb or fall asleep. The 
terms flight and race refer to the experience of the ensuing change 
of states, if consciousness persists. 

In both aspects of practice, we should consider two essential 
issues: (1) a total inner stillness, or a subtle self-awareness, which 
does not disturb the natural development and transformation of the 
breathing states, and (2) the capability to overcome organic fear. 

Exercises of this kind should be initiated and carried out with 



162 



Techniques Employed to Awaken the Serpent Power 

an adequate state of mind. In the twofold path, which I have 
characterized as normal, or as natural, the primary factor is one's 
inner orientation. If sadhana is not practiced with an open, wide, 
unlimited, and bright mind, free from worldly concerns, it will be 
difficult to cross the threshold of consciousness and to adapt to the 
first change of state. This state of mind can be propitiated or 
strengthened through suitable images that evoke the majesty, supe- 
rior calmness, and cosmic dimension of nature as well as the imper- 
sonal and boundless elements contained in it. 

In kundalini yoga the twofold "natural" procedure is not the 
only one adopted. Active interventions, which are a particular ex- 
pression of both the vital breath and of the magical imagination, are 
contemplated at higher levels, as one strives to remain in a state of 
centrality and of a calm and solar presence in this earthly life. These 
higher levels presuppose a healthy and strong physical organism 
and a heart in good condition. Second, it is necessary to train in 
order to optimize physical breathing and to fully exploit the lungs' 
capacity. The lower part of the lungs should be filled by lowering 
the diaphragm and by expanding the frontal part of the abdomen; 
then the middle part of the lungs should be filled by elevating the 
sternum and by stretching the lower ribs. Finally, the higher part of 
the lungs should be filled by pushing the chest out and by pulling 
the shoulders back. One should then breath not through the mouth 
but through the nose. These three phases eventually must be uni- 
fied in one continuous and spontaneous motion. 

I have already mentioned that Patanjali puts the realization of 
asana before pranayama. One of the most popular asanas in Hindu 
yoga is siddha-asana, as the reader may well recall. The yogin sits 
with the neck and torso upright, cross-legged. The left heel touches 
the perineum, which is the area where the muladhara-chakra is lo- 
cated and where the spinal cord ends (according to some texts it 
should obstruct the anal orifice). The right heel leans on the folded 
left leg, possibly touching the genitals and covering the penis's 
orifice. The hands are held horizontally, palms facing upward, the 
right hand under the left one, below the solar plexus. Such a 
posture should guarantee a high degree of stability. Another fre- 
quently used asana differs from siddha-asana only in that the hands 
rest on the knees; the fingers are stretched with the exception of 
thumb and of the index, forming an O. In ancient Western tradi- 
tions, bodily postures similar to Hindu asanas can also be found. A 
position having the dignity of an asana that is found in Egyptian 
iconography consisted in sitting upright on a throne, holding the 



163 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

legs together, and keeping the arms at a right angle, as they lean on 
the throne's armrests. 

As far as the esoteric dimension of the asanas is concerned, I 
have already mentioned that a preliminary contemplation, leading 
the apprentice to identify with a deity, is required. This contempla- 
tion introduces the apprentice to the esoteric meaning of each 
asana. Bodily postures should be experienced as symbols and as 
divine seals. When one assumes a given position, he should do it 
with the intention of becoming the living statue of a god. 

When the members of the body are arranged in an asana, a 
distinct fluid state (which can also be defined as a fluid sense of 
well-being) can be perceived, even if the apprentice has not devel- 
oped the subtle sensibility to a high degree. This state determines 
the stopping of the circulation of the body's pranic currents. An- 
other relevant factor is the evocation and the ensuing "freezing" of 
the "fluid state of immobility." The neutrality and the lucid fixed- 
ness of a mind that is free from mental formations should be 
infused into the body through a magical image, such as the "statue 
of a god." This process is important from a material point of view 
as well, since it allows the apprentice to maintain a still bodily 
posture for a long time without ever getting tired or sore (especially 
in the spinal cord), in virtue of an occult command transmitted to 
the physical organism. 

What I have said so far concerns the preliminary realization of 
an asana. Next, I will discuss specific practices of kundalini yoga. 
There are two levels in these practices: (1) the pranic saturation of 
the body and (2) the awakening of the serpent power. 

PRANIC SATURATION OF THE BODY 

It is said that the first thing to do is to saturate the body with prana, 
just as electricity saturates a condenser. Needless to say, prana has 
nothing to do with oxygen. The apprentice is supposed to absorb 
prana, and not the oxygen found in the air. This process can be 
separated from the physical breathing function, since the absorp- 
tion of prana can take place without breathing, or better, during the 
exhalation phase. Therefore, the process takes place on the plane of 
invisible corporeity and of its energies. The apprentice is told to 
accumulate, by inhaling, the fire power or radiant energy (tejas). 

1. Respiration according to the 2t-t-2t rhythm must be animated 
by the perception of breath as a current of bright light, coming 



164 



Techniques Employed to Awaken the Serpent Power 

and going. This current must be visualized in the event one does 
not have a direct experience of this breath. Eventually, the cur- 
rent of light becomes more intense and more saturated, and it 
feeds the chakra located at the region of the heart, which corre- 
sponds to the Shaivist I, just like a flame that grows taller after 
being blown on by the bellows. 

2. Another exercise that attempts to achieve the same results con- 
sists in the already-mentioned identification of one's body with 
a particular deity: "Visualize the physical body as being inter- 
nally vacuous, like the inside of an empty sheath, transparent 
and uncloudedly radiant." Following the breathing pace, the 
visualized figure is expanded to the size of a mountain, and 
then, during exhalation, reduced to the size of a small seed. 9 

3. A third exercise consists in imagining rays of light radiating 
from the pores of one's body during exhalation and in their 
reentering the body and filling the physical organism during 
inhalation. This exercise is complicated by the projection and 
ensuing reabsorption of sacred syllables, which are eventually 
changed into wrathful deities. 10 

The systematic repetition of the exercises causes the physical 
rhythm of breathing to turn into the mere vehicle of a mental 
rhythm, which eventually becomes predominant and autonomous. 
This is achieved either through a pranic respiration, which is per- 
formed not only with the throat but with the whole body; or 
through retention of breath; or through the inner inversion of the 
normal phases of breathing. 11 Especially in Taoism, this is a slow, 
deep, silent respiration, "resembling that of an embryo," and it is 
performed with the entire body, starting from the soles of the feet. 
The consequence of this exercise is the valorization of the vital 
energy (the Taoist equivalent of prana is chi, or "ethereal fluid"); its 
rhythm also becomes substantially immaterial. 

4. The technique of reversal of breath is mentioned in the Bhagavad- 
Gita (4:29) in the following terms: "Some offer their out-flowing 
breath into the breath that flows in; and the in-flowing breath 
into the breath that flows out." Physical breathing here has two 
inverted meanings. Inhaling should be experienced as a letting 
go and as becoming dissolved; exhaling should be experienced 
as a rising and a summoning of strengths. An intimate sense of 
continuity ought to unite the two phases. It is important to 
induce a growing imbalance and an excess of the second phase. 



165 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

One should therefore let oneself go when inhaling, in order to 
arise more decisively with each exhalation. The purpose of this 
exercise is to turn the body into an oversaturated condenser of 
pranic energy. 

5. The goal of "breathing with a progressive rhythm" is not dis- 
similar from this purpose. It consists in breathing from alternate 
nostrils according to the following rhythm: inhale = t; retention 
= 4t; exhale = 2t. This is done while reciting a mantra. 

For instance: the right nostril is blocked (at first by pressing it 
with a finger, and eventually with an inner command) and one 
inhales from the left nostril for the duration of the repetition of a 
mantra for eight times, all the while feeling the current flowing in 
the ida. Breath is then retained for the time necessary to repeat the 
same mantra thirty-two times. Then the left nostril is blocked and 
one exhales with the right nostril through the pingala for sixteen 
repetitions of the mantra. This respiration is repeated numerous 
times. After that, one reverses the order by inhaling with the right 
nostril and by exhaling with the left the same number of times. 
Third, one breathes with that rhythm and with both nostrils the 
same number of times. 

The indicated times to repeat this exercise are dawn, noon, 
evening, and midnight. The long period of retention of breath, 
which characterizes this practice, promotes the process of transfor- 
mation of energies, the fusion of prana and apana, and the produc- 
tion of magic heat. These things take place as the rhythm becomes 
increasingly slow, deep, and silent. A word of caution is issued: 
"Breath needs to be tamed gradually, as one does a wild beast, 
otherwise it will kill the apprentice." At first, a person who prac- 
tices pranayama might experience chills in the body and a sense of 
swooning. As practice is integrated with the perfect realization of 
its subtle dimension and of its inner meaning, what is considered a 
natural state in a superior order is produced. The texts, for instance, 
say that kumbhaka n is not a state that is achieved only with extreme 
effort or with hard self-discipline, but that it is rather "the normal 
state of the spirit." It is breathing that appears to be abnormal. It is 
also said that kumbhaka increases the stability and strength of the 
apprentice. 

On a physical plane, the effects of these exercises are the oppo- 
site of the effects produced by any discipline that promotes morti- 
fication of the body: 



166 



Techniques Employed to Awaken the Serpent Power 

The signs of hatha yoga's perfection are the following: the body 
becomes smooth, and the speech eloquent. One can hear inner 
sounds; the eyes become clear and shining; the organism becomes 
free from any ailments; semen is concentrated; the digestive fire 
and the various currents of breath are purified. 

In a Tantric Tibetan text the inner states accompanying the first 
practices of pranic supersaturation of the organism are described in 
these terms: 

Something akin to heat is produced at first; second, blissfulness 
is experienced; third, the mind assumes its natural state. Then 
the forming of thoughts ceases automatically, and phenomena, 
appearing like smoke, mirages, and fireflies, along with some- 
thing resembling a cloudless sky, are seen. 14 



THE AWAKENING OF THE SERPENT POWER 

After a certain time has been devoted to the exercises leading to the 
pranic supersaturation of the body, the apprentice enters the phase 
in which the exercises aimed at kundalini's awakening are prac- 
ticed. One should first find some sort of hermitage, a deserted 
place, as far as possible from cities and villages. A mountain or 
even an island is considered the most favorable place. 15 During the 
most intensive period of the cycle, the apprentice should avoid 
seeing anyone. Isolation is considered an optimal condition in the 
preliminary phases as well; it is believed to sharpen the senses and 
spiritual discernment and to foster inner peace. One should not 
share with anybody, with the exception of one's guru, what he is 
doing and what he is planning to do, much less the results or the 
effects of practice. "The gods love secrecy," and, "A yogi who is 
desirous of developing siddhis should keep this hatha yoga strictly 
secret, for only then will he have success. All his efforts will be in 
vain if he reveals everything without discrimination." 16 It is also 
important to avoid unnecessary exertions and to adopt a healthy 
diet. Vegetarianism is strongly encouraged; although in Tibet it is 
scarcely practiced, it is mandatory for Hindu yogins. For obvious 
reasons, sexual abstinence as well ought to be practiced, consider- 
ing that this practice requires the possession and transformation of 
that power of which the sexual energy is the material manifestation. 
It is necessary to achieve a state of both physical and fluid calm. In 



167 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

the ritual position advocated by the texts the apprentice should sit 
facing north. 

The care of the apprentice to become isolated from the world, 
and to create around himself a wall of physical and mental silence, 
should be accompanied by the contact with those spiritual influ- 
ences that are related to the tradition of teaching. The following is 
a propitiatory mental ritual that precedes every exercise. The ap- 
prentice imagines his own teacher to sit above his head in his same 
asana. Above his teacher, still in the same position, one should 
imagine the preceding representative in the initiatory chain, and so 
on. All of these teachers form a vertical line of similar figures, one 
on top of the other, reaching to heaven. This line gradually turns 
into light and eventually becomes confused with the "original 
teacher," who symbolizes the nonhuman spiritual influence that 
radiates along the chain. 

In the operative phase one habitually proceeds to empty his body. 
The body must be thought to be an empty shell, almost as if it were 
made of a luminous, transparent membrane of an immaterial thinness. 
The power of the visualizing concentration should be such that, forget- 
ful of his own body, the apprentice should only see this image and 
identify with it. Within this empty shell one should visualize the three 
main arteries: the pingala, ida, and sushumna. 

The symbol of a motionless Shiva holding a scepter and sur- 
rounded by Shakti as if by a fiery dress corresponds to both the 
pranic supersaturation of the body and to the central power that 
animates it and that projects the proper figures, symbols, and man- 
tras. The Shaktic dimension of this element is sometimes empha- 
sized through a procedure analogous to the one in which the ap- 
prentice spends long periods of time with a woman whom he may 
desire and yet not possess. One of these exercises consists in visu- 
alizing before oneself the "occult bride," Shakti, as a real female 
figure, endowed with several beautiful traits that are capable of 
arousing a strong passionate desire in her beholders. The figure is 
then gradually absorbed into the apprentice. 

Hatha yoga distinguishes the simple retention of breath from 
the "great retention" (mahakevala-kumbhaka). The former is the re- 
tention of breath occurring between inspiration and expiration; the 
latter is a prolonged and uninterrupted one. The former is related 
to the equalizing breathing pattern 2t-t-2t, or to the progressive 
breathing t-4t-2t. Inspiration through the pingala and expiration 
through the ida, and vice versa, may also be applied to the simple 
rhythm 2t-t-2t. A text outlines the proper technique for the simple 



168 



Techniques Employed to Awaken the Serpent Power 

retention: inspiration through the ida (left nostril), followed by 
retention of breath, expiration through the pingala and actualiza- 
tion of kumbhaka, which is the prolonged retention. This exercise 
should be repeated four times a day (early in the morning, noon, 
evening, and midnight), starting with ten kumbhakas per exercise, 
and building up to eighty kumbhakas, by increases of fives. Thus 
every day one will perform 320 kumbhakas in all. The body's perspi- 
ration and light trembling indicate the limit that may be reached 
during breath retention, with the help of an obedient and well- 
disposed organism. As far as the great retention is concerned, it can 
be associated with the physical closing of all the body's orifices. 
The lower orifices (anal and genital) are blocked by the heels if 
siddha-asana is perfectly performed. The other orifices can be closed 
with the hands: the ears with the thumbs, the eyes with the index 
and middle fingers, the nostrils with the ring fingers, the two sides 
of the mouth with the little fingers (this is the so-called shanmukkhi- 
mudrd). Later on, this closing can be obtained as a natural conse- 
quence of the inner states that have been achieved; only then will 
the closing maximize its efficacy. 

From simple retention one proceeds, through several degrees, 
to the great retention. In the Hindu Tantric texts it is associated 
with the use of the mantras HAMSAH and HUM, which are related, 
respectively, to prana and apana. By inhaling deeply and by ani- 
mating the pranic current with HAMSAH, the apprentice imagines the 
current rushing toward the muladhara-chakra. According to some 
texts, the physiological counterpart is a progressive contraction of 
the anal orifice, followed by a contraction in the torso-cardiac re- 
gion, when inspiration stops. The contraction of the sphincter is 
extended to the filum terminale, which is located around the 
muladhara-chakra. 17 When inspiration ends and the phase of breath 
retention begins, concentration on prana must be intensified ac- 
cording to the various phases of the preliminary exercises: the 
luminous phase, the warmth phase (corresponding to deep sleep), 
and the phase that is beyond everything else. The apprentice should 
go from the mantra HAMSAH to the mantra HUM, which is kundalini's 
mantra as well. All this is repeated a few times. This exercise is 
resumed during the day, but it is practiced with less frequency once 
the rhythm becomes slower and the retention of breath becomes 
longer, since in this period various transformations, as well as the 
magical warmth that will awaken kundalini, are produced. Even if 
one is not busy performing any actions, during the day the mind 
should be gathered and any eventual partial achievements should 



169 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

be consolidated. During this period sleep becomes like a short nap, 
even if one sleeps for hours. 

In the great retention the abovementioned process is strength- 
ened. Prana produces a kind of vortex, which spins faster and faster 
until a short circuit occurs, which determines the removal of what 
blocks "brahman's threshold" as well as the awakened serpent 

1 8 

power's entrance into the sushumna. 

The characteristic physical phenomenon (besides the already- 
mentioned symptoms such as perspiration and shivers) is a particu- 
lar sense of lightness, which is not just a mere subjective impres- 
sion, since in these states one is able to levitate. 19 In order to 
understand a supernatural phenomenon such as levitation, it should 
be remembered that a body's weight is subject to the law of gravity. 
This law, in turn, depends on a broader law, which encompasses 
not only the physical bodies' attraction but their mutual repelling 
as well. Attraction (which is manifested in weight), may generate 
repulsion (which is manifested in levitation) by virtue of a change 
of polarity determined by pranayama, since this involves an inver- 

90 

sion of pranic currents. 

From a subjective point of view, the awakening is preannounced 
by certain sounds, which have been compared to the intense buzz 
of a swarm of bees, and to the cracking of thunder. It may also be 
noticed that the mantra employed (HUM) is similar to the sound that 
was produced at the peak of Mithraic initiations. In relation to the 
great retention, this image is given: One should begin to sink into 
retained breath as if a circle was closing in. Then, gathering up 
one's strength, overcoming all fears, by realizing "I am Her," one 
should jump. If the jump was sufficient and if "the mind took the 
form of that knowledge," ("I am Her") one will find himself outside 
the circle, safe and well. The syncope of breath will generate the 
principle of a new life, made of amrita, which permeates the body. 
This is the regeneration produced by the Shaivist principle of 
svayambhu-linga, which is stronger than death. From the point of 
view of ordinary people, the yogin, through the kuvala-kumbhaka, 
faces a deadly trial; he could virtually kill himself, since this pro- 

9 1 

cess leads to asphyxiation. Thus the yogin becomes superior to life 
itself, since he continues to exist through a residue of energy that 
survives the point in which kundalini, having entered the sushumna, 
"lights the fire of death." 22 

The most important stage reached by the serpent power is that 
of an immediate and absolute identification: SA'M ("I am Her"). If 
one is not up to it, everything will be in vain. As we shall see in 



170 



Techniques Employed to Awaken the Serpent Power 

Appendix Two, this is almost the same trial that awaits those who 
try to achieve the Great Liberation in the afterlife. It has been said 
that the only person qualified to practice kundalini yoga is a 
shuddhabuddhisvabhana, one whose substance consists in the pure 
principle of intellectual determination (buddhi) in its proper form. 
This form is the aspect in which buddhi is on the borderline be- 
tween the individual and superindividual dimensions, and is free 
from prakriti. This is another way to refer to Shiva's virility and to 
the semen produced by the svayambhu-linga. This form can be asso- 
ciated with the braveness and boldness that are the fundamental 
prerequisites not only for the experiences of viras but for yoga in 
general. 23 

Some texts of Tibetan Tantrism mention technical details per- 
taining to special visualizations. I will mention two exercises. The 
starting point in both exercises is the realization of the form of the 
vacuous body, which contains the caduceus formed by the pingala, 
ida, and sushumna. 





In the course of the first exercise, some letters of the Tibetan 
alphabet are used as the support and as the instruments of the 
magical imagination. These letters are the short a, which corre- 
sponds to Shakti, and the long a, written ham and pronounced hum, 
which corresponds to Shiva. The reader should be aware that these 
are letters of the Tibetan and not of the Sanskrit alphabet; therefore, 
one should not mistake hum for the Sanskrit word that character- 
izes kundalini's mantra. On the contrary, hum (written ham) corre- 
sponds to the personal pronoun I and to the male Shaivist prin- 
ciple. The two letters, shown in the illustration above, must be 
visualized in this fashion. The feminine a is inside the muladhara- 
chakra, at the base of the spine, and is brown. The masculine a is lo- 
cated in the sahasrara-chakra, at the top of the head, and is white. In 
the course of the exercise, one performs a short retention of breath 
between inspiration and expiration. During inspiration the appren- 



171 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

tice should visualize his breath to run down, through the pingala 
and ida, and finally to reach the letter a that is located in the 
muladhara-chakra. When the breath reaches the muladhara-chakra, the 
letter takes on a more vivid color and becomes bright red, just like 
a fiery charcoal turning into flame. The apprentice is supposed to 
concentrate on this image and to feed it with prana especially 
during the retention of breath. After that, he must exhale, while 
imagining his breath ascending along the sushumna in the form of 
a bluish current. 

In a second set of exercises the apprentice must imagine a 
vivid, vertical flame rising vortically from the letter a located in the 
basal center (chakra). After each breath this flame grows by an inch, 
so that after ten complete breaths it has reached the chakra located 
at the navel. After ten more breaths it has reached the heart; after 
ten more, the larynx; and thus all the way to the top of the head, 
where the apprentice must visualize the flame becoming one with 
the masculine letter ham. The only stages of the process considered 
in this text are the five main chakras. The svadhishtana- chakra and 
ajna-chakra contemplated in the Tantric Hindu tradition are not 
mentioned. It is also possible that in the text, the exercise is used for 
a particular, secondary purpose, namely, for the awakening of a 
special form of magical warmth and for its diffusion over the whole 
body. This fiery fluid, called tummo, apparently manifests itself on 
the physical plane by generating an extraordinary physical heat. 
This heat is sometimes employed by Tibetan yogins who spend the 
winter season on high mountains, scantly clad (one of them was the 
famous magician and ascetic Milarepa) and deprived of any mate- 
rial protection from the freezing temperature. This exercise, though, 
can still be used in the context of kundalini yoga. 

The second exercise differs from the first only in a variation of 
the visualization process. Soon after imagining a flame emanating 
from the muladhara-chakra, the apprentice imagines that the letter 
situated on the top of the head is beginning to melt, dripping a 
substance that feeds the flame and that makes it rise higher and 
higher. Eventually the flame fills the entire sushumna up to the 
sahasrara-chakra, in which the fusion, or better, the transfiguration, 
of ham takes place. The force then assumes the nature of bodhichitta, 
according to Vajrayana terminology. 

In both exercises a descent follows the ascent, through the 
various chakras and their corresponding region until it reaches the 
muladhara-chakra. Such a process takes place simultaneously with an 
inversion of currents. The current of the red fluid originates and 



172 



Techniques Employed to Awaken the Serpent Power 

flows downward from the head; the current of the white fluid 
originates and flows upward from the muladhara-chakra. I have 
already mentioned the idea of inversion of currents in the context 
of Hindu Tantrism. In yoga, pranayama aims at reversing the natu- 
ral directions of prana (ascending) and apana (descending). 

The type of breathing to be employed in this context is an 
equalized breathing from both nostrils (2t-t-2t). Conversely, a Hindu 
text suggests inhaling with the "sun" (pingala) and exhaling with 
the "moon" (ida). This text talks about the sun drinking the moon 
and vice versa, until a reciprocal saturation is achieved. It is, how- 
ever, possible to interpret this text without a necessary reference to 
the serpent power. In the Tibetan texts, breathing through alternate 
nostrils is part of the preliminary phase of pranic saturation. 

In the abovementioned Tibetan exercises, the repeated visual- 
izations are supposed to originate a process of induction and of 
arousal. The images, which are prefigurations of the real process, 
work to make this process real. Thus, at a given moment, they are 
substituted with real states and with real manifestations of powers. 
The texts insist, however, that between the prefiguration and the 
experience there will always be a hiatus, and that the moment of 
awakening represents something discontinuous and unforeseen. The 
images will be transformed and act of their own initiative, as if they 
were animated and carried around by an extraneous force. When 
the process of visualization eludes the control of one who starts it, 
awakening is near. 

The reader may recall how three chakras (muladhara, anahata, 
ajna) evoke the theme of the linga (symbol of Shiva's virility) and 
of the yoni, an inverted triangle symbolizing Shakti and the female 
genital organ. It is said that these chakras offer a particular resis- 
tance (as if they were hostile "knots") that must be overcome as 
breath ascends along the sushumna. In reference to everyday life, 
these obstacles correspond respectively to the bonds of sexual de- 
sire, of self-love, and of the intellect (especially in the form of 
pride). Therefore, the evoked force must overcome and transform 
the energies found in each of these three chakras. If the opposite 
thing happened, in other words, if the awakened power became 
attracted and finally converged onto any of these bonds, one would 
incur one of the greatest dangers inherent to these yogic exercises. 
Instead of liberation the final result would be obsession - obsession 
with sex, with selfishness (the opposite of this bond is a false 
universal and sentimental love, encompassing everything and ev- 
erybody), and with a cold and detached intellectual pride (hubris). 



173 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

One's whole being will end up being dominated by one of these 
three factors, which having escaped control are now absolutized. 
The correspondences that the chakras have with certain affective 
dispositions are not exempt from dangers. A partial awakening of 
a chakra could unleash the affective elements associated with it, 
which would thereby get out of control. Yoga teachers warn that if 
the preliminary discipline of purification has been neglected or 
found to be not energetic enough, every leftover residue will 
"vampirize" the awakened energy and feed demons. This belief is 
also found in other initiatory traditions. Hermetists talk about the 
"second flood" that occurs as soon as one drinks a "virgin's milk"; 
Mithraism talks about the onslaught of impure animals rushing to 

"7 

eat the "three spikes of wheat." These animals, instead of blood, 
sprang from the side of the bull slain by Mithras. There is a teach- 
ing according to which "the ascent of the serpent power through 
the chakras induces the awakening and the activation of the karmic 
principles therein contained." This teaching warns us of the extent 
to which these phenomena can go. Let us also remember what has 
already been said concerning the samskaras and the vasanas, the 
subconscious roots whose origin often antedates the present life. 
These underground roots are responsible for causing the relapse 
into tendencies or states that were believed to be left behind once 
and for all, since they were removed from superficial manifesta- 
tions. These roots also cause negative attitudes (greed, anger, fear, 
vanity, etc.) that had never been manifested before to surface. These 
attitudes are samskaras and vasanas that, all of a sudden, have 
become operative after having been galvanized by the new energy 
now circulating within one's body. This energy could also be a 
manifestation of ancestral samsaric forces, in other words, of the 
effects of remote actions and of the manifestation of entities yearn- 
ing for life, with whom one stipulated obscure deals. It is easy, for 
somebody who does not have knowledge of these things, to become 
alarmed by these effects, to think that what is taking place is a 
spiritual regression, and therefore to abandon these "unhealthy" 
practices. All of this takes place within the natural logic of initiatory 
development, however. In this kind of development such a crisis 
would not take place, because the apprentice succeeded in remov- 
ing every samskara and every samsaric residue, not only in ordinary 
consciousness, but in the body and in the subconscious as well. 

It is also possible that the emergence or reemergence of resi- 
dues will take place not in the plane of the affective life and 
tendencies but in the form of visions and apparitions during the 



174 



Techniques Employed to Awaken the Serpent Power 

yogic process, thus causing more deviations. These are so-called 
projections, which have been made possible through the freedom 
from the control of the physical senses that was acquired by the 
magical imagination. Once the residual or subconscious energies, 
which we all carry within ourselves, have been loosened, they 
become objectified in a world of ghosts and various deceiving 
apparitions, which tend to confuse the unexperienced apprentice, 
inducing in him a chaotic and disintegrating visionariness. 

The need to be directed by a spiritual teacher is emphasized, 
since the teacher could help the apprentice confronted by such 
dangers. This help may also be invisible, since it may come through 
influences that do not require the physical proximity of the teacher 
in order to be effective. Tibetan texts call these influences "waves of 
gifts." In any event, in the case of reemerging and revitalizing 
tendencies or emotional states, or in the case of visible manifesta- 
tions, in order to overcome the obstacle one should remain still, 
impassible, without acting or reacting. The emergence should ex- 
haust itself, since every inner movement on the part of the yogin 
would give to the manifested force a grip on him and thus sweep 
him away. It is possible that in this way some destinies may be 
accomplished, even tragic and unintelligible ones, only if one fol- 
lows the principle of "not resisting evil" so that everything may be 
expelled, consumed, and turned to ashes after the spiritual fire has 
burned out. These, however, are rare forms of catharsis. These 
forms provoke an abortive process; what has been anticipated is 
what would have otherwise happened in the course of one's life in 
more unfavorable circumstances, because of the lack of specific 
preparation. 

In the case of apparitions and visionary phenomena ("forms of 
smoke," mirages, lights, etc.), the texts say that before them one 
must adopt a detached, though careful, attitude. One should not 
become interested or uninterested in one or the other; the spirit 
must be like that of "a child calmly looking at the walls of a 
temple," attentive, cautious, awaiting things to happen. This is the 
best way to neutralize the vampiric process and to prevent perverse 
kinds of vitality from feeding the apparitions. If these forms were 
left alone and looked upon with a calm objectivity, they would 
eventually wither and fade away. After that, what ensues is a state 
of mind that can be compared to a pure, transparent, colorless, and 
solid crystal, in which the experience of the tattvas is realized 
without distortions or darkening. 

Kundalini yoga is conceived as a positive reality that can be 



175 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

experienced independently of one's beliefs or philosophy: "If one 
engages in esoteric practices, he will obtain the same results, with 
a scientific precision, no matter what his beliefs are." One will 
eventually discover "constant and invariable" elements hidden under 
the cover of various images, which are derived, through the sub- 
conscious, from various traditions and from the branch of one's 
superbiological heredity. 

It is important to emphasize again that, although the yogic 
realizations presuppose a power of visualization identical to that of 
hallucinations or of hypnotic states, they develop in a state of 
superlucidity. Just as the hypnotizer is aware and conscious of the 
person being hypnotized, who "sees" what is being suggested to 
him, likewise the yogin is aware and conscious of his own body; the 
control that he exercises is very different from the kind of control 
one could have on a passive and extraneous subject. This is why 
there is a great difference between yogic feats and the spiritualistic 
experiences of mediums. The medium's trance is exactly the oppo- 
site of the magical state, and of the state of Shiva's presence, since 
it signifies regression into the subconscious and in the precon- 
scious. In spiritualistic phenomena, the person is left at the mercy 
of obscure influences that move chaotically behind the natural and 
human reality. Every medium either already is or will fall below 
the human condition, while a true yogin rises above it. 



176 



XII 

THE DIAMOND- 
THUNDERBOLT BODY 



Once the yogin has acquired the capability of awakening kundalini, 
he attempts, through various stages of sadhana, to channel it up- 
ward through all the chakras. This process is called urdhva-kundali 
or shat-chakra-bheda. It is compared to the opening or blossoming of 
the chakras, since they are portrayed as lotus flowers, and also 
compared to the transformation of the profane and mundane path 
into a regal path, in which "there is no longer day or night," since 
the "sushumna swallows time."' In order to reach every chakra, it 
is a standard procedure, in yogic practice, to concentrate gradually 
the mental and imaginative focus on each of them, by recalling 
their meaning and by employing the symbols and mantras that 
traditional teachings attribute to them. In such a way the awaken- 
ing power is properly led and induced to act. 

According to the texts, those who have been successful in 
awakening kundalini (a selected few among all the apprentices) do 
not necessarily know how to bring the process to conclusion, for 
this is achieved by only a few. After each ascent, kundalini returns 
to the muladhara-chakra, taking again the "dormant" form, which 
characterizes the average human condition. Kundalini should be 
recaptured and reactivated in this chakra, and then led higher and 



177 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

higher, overcoming all obstacles blocking the access to each chakra. 
It is said that when kundalini reaches a given chakra, all the pranic 
forces that depend on it are reabsorbed into their radiant center. 
They also withdraw from the body and converge into the sushumna, 
which forms one ascending conduit in which the basic life force 
flows. This has a tangible physical effect. The body becomes ice 
cold up to the level reached by kundalini, and when the serpent 
power reaches the sahasrara-chakra, the whole motionless body be- 
comes as cold as a cadaver, while a little warmth remains in one 
spot at the top of the head. This peculiar phenomenon is believed 
to take place only in kundalini yoga. Sometimes luminous phenom- 
ena are believed to occur, such as a radiance around the yogin's 
body every time he achieves various transcendent states. 

When dealing with this kind of dhyana, called "purification of 
the elements" (bhuta-shuddi), I claimed that this contemplation of 
the transformation of the body into a quasidivine body endowed 
with supernatural faculties is just a mental prefiguration of what 
really takes place in hatha yoga. I also explained the ultimate 
meaning of this purification of the elements. The tattvas are expe- 
rienced according to their nature, under the aegis of the "path of 
cessation" (nivritti-marga), consisting of transcendence and of pure 
forces exempt from any individualizing production, form, or limi- 
tation, rather than under the aegis of the "path of activity" (pravritti- 
marga), consisting in a coalescence, due to Shakti's extroverted 
orientation, of a substance with its modifications, of a producer 
with its product, of a cause with its effects. I have also shown the 
analogy of the ascending process along the sushumna with 
Mysteriosophy's "initiatory journeys." During these journeys the 
adept, after going through "seven heavenly spheres," and after 
successfully freeing himself from the influences found in each sphere, 
asks their respective rulers to allow him to go through, until, "pos- 
sessed of his own proper power," he reaches an eighth sphere, 
which is a state of ultimate identification with God. 

In this state the principle that was manifested as ego assumes 
its natural form. It is not supported by anything ("Antaeus, who 
derived his strength from the earth, eventually gets killed"), yet it 
supports everything ("Heracles has taken upon himself Atlas's 
burden" - according to an esoteric interpretation of the Heracles 
saga). In the Tantric complementary belief, the sahasrara-chakra is 
described as a "place that is not a place properly speaking," in 
which "there is no longer a 'here' or a 'not-here,' but only the great 
Void, in which there is calm enlightenment, as if it were an im- 



178 



The Diamond-Thunderbolt Body 

mense ocean." 4 The Vajrayana instead sees the sahasrara-chakra as 
the seat of the great Vajradhara, the god presiding over vajra. 

As far as the dramatic aspect of the ascent is concerned, there 
is an interesting parallel in the Kabbalistic doctrine of the so-called 
Books of the Hekhalot. The seven spheres are portrayed as seven 
heavenly palaces, through which one must walk before being ad- 
mitted to the throne. Mounting obstacles on the way hinder the 
ascent. Thus it is necessary to resort to a magical seal (actually a 
secret "name"), which puts to flight hostile forces in every sphere. 
The initiate also marks himself with this seal "in order not to be 
swept away into fire, flames, whirlwinds, and storms." According 
to an interesting saying, "a fire [kundalini] emanating from his own 
body threatens to consume him." In this situation one is expected 
to stand straight, "without hands and feet" (a similar expression is 
"to subsist with support"). This is the same situation, according to 
another saying, as that of "the transformation of Enoch's flesh into 
burning torches," a transformation that may turn out to be destruc- 
tive for those who prove not to be worthy of it. 5 According to 
Jewish tradition, Enoch is one of those beings who disappeared and 
who ascended into heaven with their bodies. 

We should now consider the third "esoteric mystery" of 
Vajrayana tradition, which consists in the assumption into heaven 
of the so-called perfect or incorruptible body. This body is the 
equivalent of the siddha-deha and of the divya-deha, known in Hindu 
Tantric schools by the name of natha-siddha. 6 One who has brought 
to completion the yogic process is a jivanmukta, a "living liberated 
being." He has finally overcome the human condition and has 
successfully deconditioned his own being. Thus he is ready to take 
leave from this finite world. As I have said, a power attributed to 
a Tantric yogin is iccha-mrityu, the faculty of committing suicide 
through an act of the will, that is, of abandoning the body as one 
would toss aside a useless instrument. In any event, the yogin has 
already had intimations of the natural death of the organism while 
living in the body as a particular individual. Death appears there- 
fore as the only opportunity to sever the last ties, this being a case 
of "belated liberation" (videhatnukti). Once the yogin arrives at the 
"supportless abode," he will never be subject to dissolution, not 
even to the "great dissolution" (mahapralaya) in which, in confor- 
mity to the rhythm of the cosmic cycles, the entire manifestation 
will be reabsorbed into the principle (= the end of the world). 

It is important to remember that according to the Hindu and 
Buddhist Tantric view, the state to be achieved is nirvana, not in 



179 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

the apophatic or supernatural sense of the word, but in a sense in 
which the yogin is united with every power of the manifestation, 
and in which he is in full possession of Shakti. This view carries 
implications regarding the body and its use, in relationship to 
which the idea of "the incorruptible body" has been developed. The 
chakras' awakening and the occupation of their seats correspond to 
the occupation of occult and subtle corporeity. This implies the 
body's transformation or regeneration. The body is no longer expe- 
rienced under tamas's aegis, that is, in a predominantly materialis- 
tic way, but under that of rajas and sattva. It should not be under- 
stood to mean that following this transformation, the outer body, as 
it has been studied by Western positive sciences, is no longer 
composed of flesh, nerves, bones, and so forth. The transformation 
in question regards not physical elements but their function. It 
signifies the I's elevation to the metaphysical plane and its union 
with the powers on which the physical elements depend and by 
which they have been made. The elements, by assuming the form 
of a particular being, have dissociated themselves and have become 
autonomous from that plane which the I now supports and rules 
according to its own laws. This reestablishes the "normal" condi- 
tion whereby the I exists and keeps on living by depending on the 
physical body in which it awoke and which is now "his" (we say 
"his" because of the limited control it exercises over it). The new 
body relies on and owes its existence to the reintegrated I, and its 
seat is no longer the particular, ephemeral body, but the matrix or 
root of corporeity in general. 

Thus the body is no longer "in bonds" (to use a Gnostic and 
Pauline expression), but becomes a "body of freedom." We also 
could refer to the esoteric understanding of the "resurrection of the 
flesh" (which has been interpreted literally by Christianity) pro- 
moted by Docetists and by Valentinians about the "apparent," 
nonphysical body of Christ. Also, the siddha-kaya and divya-deha of 
Hindu Tantrism correspond to Mahayana's theological notion of 
nirmana-kaya, which it conceives as mayavi-rupa. The term nirmana- 
kaya means "body produced as a result of an adequate transforma- 
tion," and it designates a sort of "magical body" or "apparent 
body," since the attribute mayavi derives from may a. It has already 
been pointed out that according to some, maya is the power of the 
manifestation (maya-shakti), and that according to others, it is a 
power producing appearances, as well as objects that do not exist 
in themselves. According to Mahayana theology, those beings en- 
dowed with a buddha body, when they decide to appear and to act 



180 



The Diamond-Thunderbolt Body 

in a given level of existence, do not take on an ordinary body. They 
take on nirmana-kaya, which is a "projection," or an apparent body, 
or a magical formula, all the while remaining externally indistin- 
guishable from a common body. Gnostic Docetism had something 
of this kind in mind when talking about Christ as a divine manifes- 
tation. This doctrine was obviously declared heretical from the 
start, since Christianity did not have the metaphysical interpreta- 
tive criteria necessary to understand and to uphold this deep doc- 
trine. Christianity also lacked an esoteric interpretation of its own 
tradition, according to which Christ's body, upon his resurrection, 
was not found in the tomb. 

When a body becomes a siddha-rupa, in virtue of its own na- 
ture, it enjoys the possibility of "withdrawing" the form manifested 
in all its elements - that is, of making it disappear, as easily as "a 
strong man bends his stretched arm." A parallel notion is found in 
the previously mentioned Kabbalistic views whereby the prophet 
Enoch "was taken up into heaven" with his body, thus withdraw- 
ing from the manifested world without leaving his body behind. A 
more precise correspondence is found in the magical Taoist (tao- 
chiao) theory of the s'i-kiai, the "the solution of the cadaver." Ac- 
cording to this theory, when adepts die, they do not leave their 
bodies behind, since they have "broken down the body," in a way 
similar to that in which laya yoga pursues the body's "solution" or 
unsealing. The Gnostic notion of "glorious body" is the equivalent 
of the "transformed body" notion. In Tibet, this body is called jai- 
lus, "rainbow body," and it is said that while in it, one may become 
invisible at will. If one agrees with the doctrinal presuppositions, 
there should be no difficulties in accepting this. 

The theory of "conditional immortality" converges with these 
ideas. The premise of this theory is that in ordinary life the body 
constitutes the foundation of the individual's sense of identity. 
Thus, in order to survive death, one has to remove, in his or her 
body, all those conditionings that make it perishable. This was also 
one of alchemy's goals. We may also recall the ancient Egyptian 
notion of sahu, whereby soul and spirit, respectively the "name" 
and the power of an individual, are transformed and united to such 
an extent that, after death, they remain whole (the term sahu means 
"to stand up," "not to fall"). 7 This notion is also found in Alexandrian 
Gnosticism and later surfaced in Western magical-initiatory tradi- 
tions. According to Agrippa, neither the soul nor what he calls 
"twice subtle" (eidolon) may avoid dissolution and become immor- 
tal unless they unite with the sublime power represented by the 



181 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

mind, understood in this context along lines parallel with the pure 
Shaivist principle (vajra-chitta). Agrippa calls "a standing, and not 

o 

a falling, soul" that which has become integrated in the aforesaid 
fashion. Not only does "every magical virtue," namely, the capabil- 
ity of bringing any task to completion "by itself, stem from it 
without any outside help whatsoever"; but also, this is the only 
soul that will not experience death, along with any eidolon and any 
power or element of the organism that has undergone a similar 
integration. The mystical and neo-pythagorean view of the iaugoeides, 
a radiant, eternal entity enclosed in a body, 9 refers rather to the 
notion of subtle corporeity enclosed in the depths of the bodily 
structure. 

These experiences are proper to the supreme achievements of 
hatha yoga, and they represent horizons that the overwhelming 
majority of human beings can perceive only from a transcendental 
distance. Despite this, Tantrism attributes to adepts, be they viras 
or divyas, thaumaturgical or paranormal powers, or siddhis. It 
seems that, at least theoretically, there is nothing that a yogin 
proficient in shakti-sadhana cannot do. This "power of doing any- 
thing" is susceptible to a double interpretation, in the sense of licere 
and in the sense of posse. The first meaning evokes antinomianism: 
the siddha-yogin can do as he pleases (he is svecchakari), since the 
merging of "three rivers" (the pingala, ida, and sushumna) renders 
him superior to any impurity or fault. In him there is no karma, "no 
sin, no virtue, no heaven, no rebirth." 10 

The terms licere and posse are somewhat interdependent. In a 
nondualistic worldview everything is permitted for those who can 
do all things, since only a higher power may set a limitation to 
licere. Tantric and Hindu metaphysics do not hold moral laws and 
values in the same esteem accorded to them by many Western 
philosophical systems. The latter tend to attribute to them an intrinsic 
validity, which is to say, an abstract and baseless validity. In the 
former, every value and law has a meaningful role to play only in 
a particular domain of conditioned existence, in which it mainly 
expresses the form of the power supporting it. Here it is a matter 
of defining the hierarchical relationship between a Siddha, this 
power, and, generally speaking, with the degree of "deconditioning" 
of the siddha himself, which highlights not only strength but also 
the detachment characteristic of invulnerability and superiority. 

It should not be assumed that every yogin devotes himself to 
the production of sensational and supernatural feats by employing 
his powers and his inviolability, thus performing wonders that 



182 



The Diamond-Thunderbolt Body 

ordinary people would enjoy and take pride in. The yogin truly has 
such powers. We also saw that in ancient texts of the Indo-Aryan 
tradition there is almost an ostentation in listing all the deeds that 
a person endowed with "knowledge" may freely perform without 
being blamed, since it is believed, according to antinomianism, that 
the spirit is beyond good and evil. At the level of pure yoga, the 
acquisition of powers is concomitant with the natural loss of all the 
instincts and passions that would induce a pashu to employ them. 
The yogin has no interest in such activities, 11 apart from specific 
circumstances. This could possibly mark a difference between the 
viras and the Left-Hand Path on the one hand, and the divyas on 
the other hand. The Tantric ideal of the coexistence of liberation 
and enjoyment, which consists in being open to all experiences in 
the world, may eventually induce a vira to pursue a practice in 
which he may exercise his power "beyond good and evil." Con- 
versely, the divya, or yogin, is on too high a plane to pursue this 
line of conduct and to affirm himself in the domain of visible 
actions. 

In the divya it seems that action and disregard of moral laws 
play a major role in overcoming ecstatic states and in effectively 
achieving the unconditioned. Some light may be shed on this teach- 
ing by the esoteric Islamic school of the Melewis. They distinguish 
three stages. In the first stage, an ecstatic beatitude is experienced 
by those who break free from their egos, who embrace the universe 
and all living beings, thus experiencing an elation that is also a 
deep peace. This is called a state of negative unity. In the second 
stage, one experiences powers, such as the ones I previously men- 
tioned: this stage is not automatically achieved by all those who 
have entered the first one. It requires an affirmation and a different 
employment of consciousness and of the individual's will, at a 
point in which one no longer has desires. This is the path of pure, 
magical action, and if it is followed thoroughly, it leads to the third 
state, of positive unity. In it one finds no more ecstasies. All mys- 
tical residues have been consumed, and what remains is the realiza- 
tion of the supreme, unpronounceable mystery. 

Those who are curious about specific powers should refer to 
the well-known exposition found in the third chapter of Pataryali's 

1 9 

Yoga-Sutra, since it is the general opinion that an authentic yogin, 

no matter what school he belongs to, is in possession of supernatu- 
ral powers. More specifically, the Tantras mention these five pow- 
ers: uttakanam, the power to avert and to repel; vashikaranam, the 
power to subdue (e.g., minds and powers); stambhanam, the power 



183 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

to arrest (e.g., a storm, render a person speechless); vidveshanam, the 
power to kindle strife and struggles; and svastyayanam, the power 
to protect, to help, and to heal. The stimulation of each chakra 
confers power over the corresponding elements. For instance, the 
awakening of the svadisthana-chakra makes it possible, in special 
circumstances, to suspend the fire's power (to render the body 
immune to fire) or to start a fire without those circumstances nor- 
mally required to produce one. This brings us back to what was 
said about the mantras. In some Tibetan texts that I have often 
referred to, one encounters these further indications: Through the 
earth chakra one acquires an extraordinary material strength. 
Through the water chakra one may acquire youthful energies, thus 
neutralizing the processes of aging and of organic decay ("The 
Water of Life"). Through the fire chakra one acquires the power of 
transforming and of dissolving the elements (this corresponds to 
the Hermetic saying solve et coagula). Through the air chakra one 
obtains the power of levitation, and also speed, both in a physical 
sense and in the sense of a projection of one's image in a place 
conjured by thought (bilocation). Through the ether chakra one will 
add the power to overcome the resistance of water and of the earth, 
that is, to be able to cross water and land. The same happens in the 
spiritualistic phenomena called "aport phenomena." Specific ac- 
tions on the solar and lunar principles are believed to make one's 
body shadowless or invisible to others. The same text emphasizes 
the reference to a special realization that is the counterpart to these 
siddhis, namely, the "opening of the two spiritual doors," memory 
and will. They are both believed to be free of individual spatial- 
temporal limitations and to be open to the Siddha. 14 

The Tantras go on to reaffirm the ancient Vedic-brahmanic and 
Buddhist belief in the siddha's superiority to all other "divinities." 
The siddha has power over "three worlds." No god, including 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Hari-Hara, can resist him. The possibility of 
doing as one pleases and to prevent things from happening is 
theoretically upheld. The siddha is "Lord of Death" (mrityunjeya) in 
the specific sense of being able to kill the body through an act of the 
will - the so-called samhara-mudra, the "act of dissolution" 15 - of not 
experiencing death, and of transferring one's consciousness to any 
chosen level of existence. A siddha, according to Milarepa, 16 "goes 
at will through existences as an untamed lion freely roams a moun- 
tainous region." A power often considered by Tantrism is the so- 
called phowa. On the one hand, this power consists in projecting 
oneself outside one's body, into "bodies" corresponding to other 



184 



The Diamond-Thunderbolt Body 

"abodes" or cosmic planes. On the other hand, it consists in assum- 
ing someone else's body, thus becoming the real driving force 
behind that person's thoughts, resolutions, and passions, which he 
still believe to be his. In particular, a Siddha cannot lie, since his 
word is a word of power, which commands to reality; thus every- 
thing he says would come true. In him the fundamental Tantric 
motif of the unity of bhoga and mukti is actualized. He enjoys the 

1 n 

dignity of chakravarti, of a "World Ruler," and also a freedom that 
cannot be experienced anywhere else. The Tantras therefore claim 
that there is no yoga as powerful as kundalini yoga. 

In some texts, the siddhis are considered to be symptoms and 
supernatural proofs of all initiatory realizations, since they are not 
reducible to mere subjective or pseudomystical states. It is also said 
that these powers may represent a danger and an obstacle on the 
way to complete fulfillment. According to a doctrine that sees 
power (shakti) as the fundamental principle of the world, such a 
danger may arise only when the powers engender a dependency. In 
this case one leans on them and derives from them the meaning and 
purpose of one's life and self, rather than considering them with the 
same indifference with which ordinary people employ working 
tools, in which case it is obvious that through the same power one 
would fall back into conditioned existence, finding barred the doors 
of a world that "stands supportless," a world of the "naked god," 
wielding a royal scepter. 



185 



CONCLUSION 



Aside from the ideas concerning India that feed the popular imagi- 
nation (based on Gandhi, fakirs, and the like), and aside from the 
prejudiced views of some Catholic thinkers (who have frequently 
categorized India under the label "pantheism"), even those who 
have analyzed Hindu tradition on a higher level and in greater 
depth have somehow missed the point. These scholars, in fact, have 
usually characterized India as the expression of a spirituality that is 
essentially ascetic, contemplative, and otherworldly. According to 
these scholars, India's spiritual ascetics flee the world and seek 
liberation, which is obtained by being reabsorbed into formless 
transcendence, or into brahman, as a drop of water is reabsorbed 
into the ocean. After Buddhism was reduced to little more than a 
humanitarian moral code and after it came to be associated with the 
stereotypical concept of an evanescent nirvana, 1 the views of Vedanta 
(I have already pointed out the Tantric criticisms of this darshana) 
have become instrumental in shaping the current popular opinion 
concerning Hindu spirituality. The views of Vedanta have been 
popularized by more or less genuine contemporary epigones of 
Hinduism and by various Western spiritualist and intellectual circles. 
A prime example is Rene Guenon, an eminent exponent of integral 



186 



Conclusion 

Traditionalism, who has presented Vedanta as the quintessence and 
most genuine expression of Hindu thought and metaphysics. In 
relation to this, one may be inclined to believe in the thesis that 
claimed that Eastern civilization (by generalizing one goes from 
India to the whole Orient) had developed essentially under the 
aegis of contemplation and of world renunciation, while Western 
civilization had developed under the aegis of man's affirmation, 
action, domination, and power. 

There is an element of truth in this view, which nevertheless 
should be criticized for its one-sidedness and incompleteness. In 
fact, the reader has probably recognized within the complex history 
of Hindu ideas and schools of thought (darshanas) the existence of 
a tradition that clearly contradicts the popular views concerning 
India's spirituality and the alleged antithesis between East and 
West. On the one hand, it is true that contemporary orientalists are 
inclined to ascribe a greater importance to Tantrism than was pre- 
viously given to it. On the other hand, it has not been a long time 
since the West became acquainted with Tantrism. Still, it cannot be 
said that Tantrism has given to India its essential identity; this, 
however, does not mean that its role and its meaning should be 
overlooked. 

In these final and brief considerations, I am not going to refer 
to Tantric yoga as such (hatha yoga and kundalini yoga) nor to its 
transcendent objectives, which can be achieved only by a few indi- 
viduals who are exceptionally qualified and predisposed. I will 
rather refer to those Tantric elements that are systematized in a 
general worldview, and in particular to Shaivism and to the Path of 
the Left Hand. 

By referring to this worldview, I raise the danger that what I 
have said elsewhere 4 in an attempt to differentiate an Eastern and 
a Western myth (after having criticized some inconsistent and su- 
perficial views) may lose its validity. In that context I had stated, by 
simplification, that India was to be credited for the ideal of libera- 
tion and the West was to be credited for the ideal of liberty. On the 
one hand, there is the impulse to escape from the human condition 
in order to become reintegrated in an absolute from which we 
separated ourselves only to end up in a world of illusion (maya). 
On the other hand, there is the impulse to feel free in a world that 
is no longer denied, but that is rather considered as a field for 
action and for experiencing of all the possibilities inherent in the 
human condition. 

Now, it is clear that with Tantrism the differentiation between 



187 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

liberation and liberty no longer subsists, since, as a general rule, 
Tantrism, in its spirit - leaving out of consideration the framework 
of local traditions - should be considered distinctly Western. It is 
more conspicuously Western than Christian soteriology, which pro- 
claims an ideal of salvation from a world that is looked upon as a 
"vale of tears" and contemplates the destiny of a human nature that 
has been infected with sin and that stands in need of redemption. 
In Tantrism we find a very interesting phenomenon; those ascetic 
techniques that were well known in India are no longer employed 
in order to achieve an otherworldly liberation but in order to 
achieve liberty within the world. These techniques are supposed to 
bestow on a superior human type an invulnerability that allows one 
to be open to every worldly experience, and that grants the power 
to "transform the poison into medicine." The password of Tantrism 
is not the incompatibility, but rather the unity, of spiritual disci- 
pline (sadhana) and enjoyment of the world (bhoga); this has led 
Tantrism to take issue with Vedanta's view of the world as "illu- 
sion" (maya), since Tantrism has perceived the reality of the world 
in terms of power, or of Shakti. 

We have also encountered, when examining the ethics of the 
Path of the Left Hand and the disciplines leading to the destruction 
of the human limitations (pasha), forms of anomia, or of something 
"beyond good and evil," which are so extreme that they make the 
Western supporters of the theory of the superman look like innocu- 
ous amateurs. What is significant, in this context, is the emphasis 
given to a dimension that these supporters of the superman totally 
ignore: the dimension of transcendence, or better yet, of an "imma- 
nent transcendence." We are far beyond the "blond beast" and the 
individualist anarchists, who are inspired by a materialistic, secu- 
lar, and Darwinian worldview. We are dealing here with a liberty 
that, as we have seen, implies previous disciplines not dissimilar to 
those advocated by traditional asceticism and by a transcendent 
orientation. This view has almost no equivalent in the universal 
history of ideas. 

As I have said in the Introduction, Tantrism became wide- 
spread in India around the fifth century A.D. The doctrinal formu- 
lation of its views may be dated, at latest, around 650 A.D. Between 
then and now have passed quite a few centuries. It is therefore 
interesting to notice that if we adapt the traditional Hindu doctrine 
of the four ages of the world (yugas), Tantrism anticipated a situ- 
ation that corresponds to our modern times. Tantrism has foretold 
the phase of the last age (Kali Yuga), whose essential traits - those 



188 



Conclusion 

of an epoch of dissolution - can incontrovertibly be recognized in 
so many events and trends of our day and age. With this in mind, 
Tantrism has sanctioned the expiration of traditional spiritual forms 
that in previous epochs presupposed a different existential situa- 
tion and a different human type. Tantrism also sought out new 
forms and new paths that might prove efficacious even in the "dark 
age," and it tried to implement the realization of the same ideal of 
other epochs, namely, the awakening and the activation of the 
dimension of transcendence within humankind. There is a limit to 
this, though. According to the Tantras, the path to be followed is 
that which in other times was kept secret in view of the dangers 
associated with it. This path is reserved only for a small minority 
(for the viras and the divyas): it is implicitly precluded to the 
masses, because, it is claimed, the majority of people living in the 
dark age are pashus, animal-like, conformist, limited individuals, 
who would not comprehend the doctrine, or who would be ruined 
by it, because of their lack of necessary qualifications. 

We may well say that the essence of the way to be followed in 
the dark age is summed up in the saying "riding the tiger." I am 
not even dreaming of proposing Tantrism to the Western world, or 
of importing it here in the West, so that people may practice it in 
its original aspects. These aspects, as we have seen, are strictly and 
inseparably interwoven with local Hindu and Tibetan traditions 
and with the corresponding spiritual climate. 6 Nonetheless, some of 
Tantrism's fundamental ideas may be considered by those who 
wish to deal with the problems encountered in our day and age, by 
assuming avant-garde positions and by attempting new and valid 
syntheses. 7 

In my book Cavalcare la tigre (Riding the tiger) I have tried to 
indicate the existential attitudes proper to a differentiated human 
type who lives in an era of dissolution and in a world in which 
"God is dead" (naturally, this is only a theistic image typical of 
devotional religion, which is recently experiencing a deep crisis). In 
this world there are no longer any values left standing, and all the 
surviving traditional structures are just residues, empty shells, in- 
capable of offering a real support and a true meaning of life. In 
another work of mine, Metaphysics of Sex, I have evaluated the 
potential transcendence of the sexual experience, which, as we have 
seen, constitutes the foundation of sexual practices of the Tantric 
Vamachara. In this book I wanted to indicate those elements of 
human sexuality that can be set against those elements that in 
contemporary civilization have an endemic, obsessive, and primi- 



189 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

tivist character; I also wished to set these transcendent elements 
against the turbid, repressed sexuality that is considered by Freud- 
ian psychoanalysis. 

Having introduced the reader to a relatively unknown tradi- 
tion of Hindu spirituality, very different indeed from the Vedantic 
and neo-Vedantic contemplative orientation; having described one 
of the most interesting forms of yoga, namely, kundalini yoga, in its 
original form, without attempting to adapt it or to popularize it, I 
sincerely hope that this present exposition will offer to some read- 
ers a few elements for meditation, outside the context of specialized 
Oriental studies and in the context of their personal problems. 



190 



Appendix One 

BARDO: 
ACTIONS AFTER DEATH 



Recently the Western world has become acquainted, through vari- 
ous translations, with a number of Tibetan Buddhist texts concern- 
ing afterlife experiences and the opportunities afforded to the I in 
the postmortem state. 1 These texts are particularly interesting to 
Westerners because our hemisphere, which has been dominated by 
monotheistic beliefs, has never known such spiritual horizons. I 
have decided to consider these texts here, moreover, because their 
translators have characterized them as "works more or less Tantric." 

In spite of the predominantly Mahayana Buddhist worldview 
at the basis of such texts, the nature of the teachings contained 
therein is markedly Tantric. Action, in this context, takes place at 
the precise moment of death and even beyond death, and it aims at 
suspending the karmic interplay of cause and effect and eventually 
at realizing the unconditioned. 

The Hindu tradition, both in its brahmanic and Buddhist com- 
ponents, had given special consideration for some long time to 
the notions of jivanmukta (one who, while still alive, rids himself of 
the bonds of existence) and of videhamukta (one who achieves the 
fullness of liberation only when his spirit becomes free from the 



191 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

hindrances of the physical body; this occurs either at death or at a 
later stage). Similarly to other traditions, whether religious or not, 
the Hindu tradition emphasizes that the way and the mental 
frame in which one dies have far-reaching repercussions in the next 
world. Tantrism alone, however, formulated a real "science of death" 
and emphasized the notion of "freedom of choice" toward our 
otherworldly destiny. 

This principle does not apply to the vast majority of people, 
however, for whom death represents a deep crisis. The change in 
state that corresponds to this crisis is experienced by people as 
some kind of swooning or as being knocked unconscious, according 
to an almost mechanical connection of causes and effects called 
karma (everything one does during an earthly existence has far- 
reaching repercussions). This connection will determine a new con- 
ditioned existence, totally unrelated to previous lives, since there 
is no true personal continuity of consciousness between them all 
("as a flame ignites another flame"). We may notice that one of the 
possible meanings of the term pashu - referring to the ordinary, 
conditioned human - is "sacrificial victim," an animal about to be 
sacrificed. This brings us back to the concept of pitriyana, which is 
one of the two paths to the next world considered in Hindu tradi- 
tions. In this path, which most people are forced to tread, death 
releases personality to the ancestral forces of the stock of origin, the 
same way an animal is sacrificed to the gods and becomes nourish- 
ment for other lives. Thus the only thing that continues to live on 
is the abovementioned karmic process. This was also the case of the 
second path, the "path of the gods" (devayana). The exoteric teach- 
ings on reincarnation never put much emphasis on the deceased's 
freedom of choice, and understood the various changes of states 
leading to the great liberation to be almost automatic, or to be mere 
effects of a preexistent force and knowledge. Conversely, the texts 
I have mentioned in this appendix contemplate a higher degree of 
indetermination and freedom, as well as the possibility of directing 
the supernatural processes "as a horse is led by the bridle." Through 
the "narrow and dangerous crossing of the bardo" (bardo designates 
the hereafter) the karmic determinism can be halted (even that 
karma which "could have led one to the deepest of all hells"), the 
great liberation may be achieved, and one may even create a better 
destiny for oneself. 

As I have said before, however, these possibilities are not 
within everybody's reach. It is assumed, for instance, that during 
the earthly existence one must already have trodden a part of the 



192 



Bardo: Actions After Death 

Way and sought the unconditioned, without having arrived at the 
end of the journey, and yet having shifted one's inner center out of 
samsara's reach. Therefore the texts emphasize the "great impor- 
tance of having had experiences." These people, too, see death with 
the same traits that are seen by pashus; it befalls an individual at 
a given time, owing to extraneous causes. Esoteric teachings offer 
advice on how to prevent death from being an interruption, and 
how to take advantage of the postmortem states in extremis, as far 
as the goals pursued in life are concerned. 

The starting point consists in a lucid and objective knowledge 
of these states. Woodroffe calls this knowledge "a traveller's guide 
to other worlds." 4 After giving a description of these states, the 
texts explain their meaning and indicate the stands one is supposed 
to take in each of them. These are the contents of the Bardo Thodol 
(the Tibetan Book of the Dead), the Egyptian Book of the Dead, and 
other medieval treatises, such as the Ars moriendi. 5 The Bardo be- 
longs to the category of tertna, namely, of "secret revelations"; it 
therefore has an initiatory character. According to tradition, the 
Bardo was originally composed by the sorcerer Padmasambhava, 
who came from northwestern India to Tibet in the eighth century. 
The text was hidden by him, but was recovered by his disciples in 
the fourteenth century. The Tibetan Book of the Dead is almost a 
viaticum; it is read by the lamas to those who are about to die, in 
order to prepare them for what is to come. The text contemplates 
the possibility that the guru may magically support a disciple's soul 
following the death of the body, and that he may instill in it the 
powers of memory and of knowledge; this obviously presupposes 
a highly qualified guru. These practices, however, take place within 
an initiatory context. After all, it was an ancient Greek teaching that 
"he who is not initiated is far from achieving spiritual realization; 
he is immersed in mud, both in this life and, more so, in the next 
life." Olympiodorus spoke of "two initiations: those that take place 
in this life, which are just a preparation, and those that take place 
in the heavens." 6 The latter may be associated with the experiences 
taking place in the bardo mentioned in the Tibetan Tantric texts. 

At this point I do not wish to discuss the general problem of 
the afterlife, but simply to repeat what has already been said about 
the whimsical belief in reincarnation. According to the Mahayana 
Buddhist perspective, an individual does not constitute an indis- 
soluble unity; on the contrary, he is an aggregate of states, stages of 
consciousness, and elements. The "life" that preexists birth and 
survives after death is not an I, but rather the central force that has 



193 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

determined such an aggregate. After this aggregate is dissolved, 
following death, the central force will determine new aggregates, 
according to immanent causes that were either awakened or 
unfulfilled in the previous existence. Such a force might be called 
the "samsaric I," if this were not a contradiction in terms. Bud- 
dhism calls it santana, which means "current," "flow," "connection 
of states." This force is not the transcendent Shaivist principle, 
because that principle is here being swept away and almost sub- 
merged by shakti, which is "desire," or a blind, irrational, and 
extroverted force yearning to be released. This force is not even the 
individual I of ordinary people, since this conscious I is only a 
segment or a part of this flux, and is conditioned by the contingent 
unity of a given aggregate. 7 At death, the aggregate dissolves and 
a given being gives rise to various beings ("feeds" various beings) 
and to various consciousness, each following its own law. What 
remains is the central force that creates aggregates (the antar-bhava, 
which I mentioned in Chapter IX, should be identified with it). This 
force can populate and become manifested in various planes of 
conditioned existence; it is not necessarily confined to the human or 

o 

earthly plane. 

A case apart is that of people who have practiced initiatory 
disciplines or who, in very particular circumstances, have experi- 
enced an analogous "opening." These people, in addition to the 
samsaric force that creates aggregates, are endowed with a true I 
that is an extrasamsaric principle preserving its own form, even 
though that form is detached from all those psychic and subtle 
elements that determine the human condition. 9 This I still enjoys a 
degree of freedom and a virtual indetermination in regard to karmic 
laws. The Tibetan word bardo is made up of bar, which means 
"between," and do, which means "two" (bardo, "between the two"). 
Accordingly, it has been translated as "intermediate state," mean- 
ing a state between two lives. The main meaning should be instead 
"state between the two," referring to an uncertain state, which has 
not been univocally determined, almost a crossroads. This interpre- 
tation has been adopted in numerous places by the translators of 
the Bardo Thodol themselves. The teaching contained in this text 
assumes the indetermination of the postmortem states and of the 
moment of death confronting those who, after having followed a 
spiritual discipline, are capable of avoiding or of overcoming the 
swoon that is inherent in the change of state. These people can 
make a difference. These people can act and guide their own des- 
tiny. If their own strength is not sufficient to allow them immedi- 



194 



Bardo: Actions After Death 

ately to reach the supreme liberation, then they are shown the 
means to choose a new manifestation in the conditioned world and 
how to avoid the worst circumstances. 

The texts mostly emphasize three bardos, or planes of indeter- 
mination, which correspond to three hierarchically arranged cross- 
roads or turning points: the chikai-bardo, the chonyid-bardo, and the 
sidpa-bardo. In each of these three levels is a series of doors. Those 
who do not succeed in the first bardo have the possibility to succeed 
in the second bardo; if they do not pass the test in the second bardo 
they still have some opportunities available to them in the third 
bardo, which concerns manifestations in more conditioned forms. It 
is still possible, however, that action will fail in the third bardo as 
well. This happens when the samsaric residues still retain a power 
strong enough to neutralize the initiatives of the I principle. In that 
case, the process unfolds the way it does in the pashu's case. It is 
therefore meaningless to talk about a true continuity, since death 
did not awaken a "living being." In these people we find only the 
aggregating samsaric force, which acts according to the aforesaid 
mechanism of causes and effects under the influence of desire and 
concupiscence. This force will eventually generate the phantasm of 
an individual life. 

After this clarification, let us proceed to examine the various 
possibilities encountered in the afterlife. The core of the entire 
practical teaching contained in the Bardo Thodol is the Mahayanic, 
Tantric, and Vedantic doctrine of identity. According to this Advaita 
(nondualism) doctrine, there is no difference between the I and the 
supreme principle, since man in his essence is the principle, though 
he may not know it. Man is free when, having overcome ignorance, 
he implements this identity by acknowledging the metaphysical 
deceptiveness of everything that looks like "other," or a distinct 
reality, whether natural, divine, or demonic. Such an awareness 
consumes every bond and destroys every otherworldly spectrum. 
The text repeatedly encourages the deceased to hold on fast to this 
truth, in each phase, for here is the key to success. 

As far as other details are concerned, it is necessary first to 
learn the "art of dying." The tired, tamasic attitude that overwhelms 
people before they fall asleep is extremely deleterious, and so is the 
anguished, resigned attitude with which most people take leave of 
this world. "Indomitable faith combined with supreme serenity of 
mind are indispensable at the moment of death." 10 The spirit must 
not falter; also, one should not let the mind get distracted, not even 
for an instant. 11 It is necessary to cut oneself free from any attach- 



195 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

ments, and to extinguish hatred. The most important thing to do 
during the change of state is not so much to remember religious 
images as to bring to mind what one has achieved during his life, 
to hold on to such a memory, and to keep in mind the teachings 
concerning the phenomenology of the afterlife: 

Whatever the religious practices of any one may have been, 
whether extensive or limited, during the moments of death vari- 
ous misleading illusions occur; and hence this Thodol is indispens- 
able. To those who have meditated much, the real Truth dawneth 
as soon as the body and the consciousness-principle part. The ac- 
quiring of experience while living is important: they who have 
then recognized the true nature of their own being and thus have 
had some experience, obtain great power during the Bardo of the 
Moments of Death, when the Clear Light dawneth. 

The following formula is recited at one's deathbed: 

O nobly-born (so and so by name), the time hath now come for 
thee to seek the Path in reality. Thy breathing is about to cease. 
Thy guru hath set thee face to face before with the Clear Light; 
and now thou art about to experience it in its Reality in the Bardo 
state, wherein all things are like the void and cloudless sky, and 
the naked, spotless intellect is like unto a transparent vacuum 
without circumference or centre. At this moment, know thou 
thyself; and abide in that state. I too, at this time, am setting thee 
face to face. 13 

The phenomenology of death is presented in the following terms: 

Light [the whole of visible aspects of reality] subsideth and the 
Gross [the body, the feeling of one's body] subsideth. Thoughts 
subside and the Subtle [this is a reference not to the subtle form 
but to some subtle phenomena which take place at the time of 
death] subsideth. 14 

The disappearance of the sensible light and of the feeling of 
one's body is described in terms of a passage through those ele- 
ments, which were also mentioned in ancient Mysteriosophy. In 
Mysteriosophy the transformations that naturally take place at death 
(the earth sinking into water, the water into fire, the fire into air, the 
air into ether) were either induced or anticipated. These are inner 



196 



Bardo: Actions After Death 

states in which "the perception of all material realities is totally lost 
and the gross element subsides." Concomitantly, the senses are 
reabsorbed in this order: first sight, then smell, taste, touch, and 
hearing. According to the Upanishads, during this state all the 
faculties are reabsorbed first into their roots (manas) and then into 
the vital force. At death the vital force, which looks like a luminous 
subtle force, is the vehicle employed during the ensuing changes of 
states by those who participated in knowledge in the course of their 
earthly lives. 15 After all, it is possible that the aforesaid passage 
through the elements is not unrelated to the lower chakras, or, in 
other words, that it may be related to the "sinking inward" of the 
human aggregate. The "air" corresponds to the chakra of the heart, 
and the space between it and the chakra of ether may be considered 
that in which, at the moment of death, the individual's crisis of 
consciousness takes place. 

The texts indicate some internal and external signs suggesting 
that death is imminent. The dying person is believed to see a 
white light, similar to moonshine, which eventually turns reddish. 
The commentary to the text mentions that some Europeans have 
had similar experiences at their deathbed, as they pronounced words 
such as "Light, more light!" (mehr Licht - Goethe), or "The light 
rises!" Ignoring the nature of this phenomenon, these people may 
have mistaken it for a real transfiguration, instead of seeing it as a 
mere psychophysical change that takes place in the sense of sight at 
death. These changes, in the case of profane people, are accompa- 
nied by intense emotions. One experiences a kind of "smoke" that 
gradually obscures the mind from within. This is the moment of 
crisis. Those who succeed in maintaining their spirit "free from 
mental formations," thanks to the yogic discipline that they prac- 
ticed in their lifetime, can overcome this crisis. In these people's 
case, the experiences of this process, as soon as they occur, will sink 
into a natural feeling of calm, without any sense of discontinuity. 
This moment is characterized by the shining of the transcendent 
light, which has emerged following the dissolution occurring at 
death. According to the text, this is supposed to happen three and 
a half to four days after death. Other people, on the contrary, 
experience swooning and slip into unconsciousness, from which 
they recover only after this period. During this period the second- 
ary components and "degrees of consciousness" of the human be- 
ing gradually become autonomous and go their own way, often 
ending up in a zone of "wandering influences." This zone is like a 
tank of subpersonal, inferior, or residual forces. These forces, inci- 



197 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

dentally, are responsible for causing the array of spiritualist phe- 
nomena. 1 It is possible that a relatively unitary form may continue 
to exist after death for a short period of time. This form is some 
kind of double, or better, an automatic and lifeless image of the 
deceased; it is like a second corpse - a psychic corpse - which has 
been left behind. 

After recovering from the "swoon" (i.e., death), consciousness 
awakens in a state of supernatural lucidity and finally has the most 
decisive experience, which strikes it with the power of a thunder- 
bolt. This experience consists in the manifestation of the absolute, 
primordial light. ("From the midst of that radiance, the natural 
sound of reality, reverberating like a thousand thunders simulta- 

1 7 

neously sounding, will come." ) This is the real test. The I should 
overcome all fears and be capable of identifying with this light, 
since it shares its metaphysical nature. Being capable of this iden- 
tification grants the achievement of the great liberation and the 
realization of the unconditioned. Every karma and every residue is 
eventually destroyed. The text says that this experience should be 
like "meeting old acquaintances." The consequence of this identifi- 
cation is described as the unification - as the waters of a river flow 
into the ocean" - of what was and was not acquired during one's 
lifetime (knowledge and the amount of light that had been glimpsed, 
the former; the totality of knowledge and of the light, the latter). 

It is possible that this test may be unsuccessful, however. One 
may be overcome by sheer terror and lack the spiritual courage, the 
sacrificial elan, and the necessary lucidity for a quick identification 
and for a total, instantaneous rejection of avidya (transcendental 
ignorance). When one fails this first test, he goes from the chikai- 
bardo to the second bardo, called chony id-bar do. On this latter plane 
one is faced with similar alternatives; the only difference is that 
these experiences are no longer free of form. One is confronted with 
a phantasmagorical, dreamlike world of visions and apparitions. 
This world is produced by an inhibited imagination, which is no 
longer subject to the control exercised by the senses. This imagina- 
tion acquires the traits of what I have called the "magical imagi- 
nation," which generates similar visions with an elementary inten- 
sity, through projections and the exteriorization of conscious and 
subconscious contents. Chonyid-bardo is a plane that offers the po- 
tential for liberation to those who did not perceive the uncondi- 
tioned in its sheer metaphysical purity, but rather perceived it in 
the form of a given divine figure, symbol, or cultic image. What is 
being decided on this plane is the capability of overcoming the 



198 



Bardo: Actions After Death 

mirage and of achieving a state of identification with this phan- 
tasmagorical world. This test takes place in two stages. 

The unconditioned ceases to appear in its formless, thunder- 
bolt-like nature and becomes perceivable by the senses, at first in 
the form of various majestic and radiant divine figures, which 
appear one after the other in the course of seven days. A "day" in 
this context has a symbolic meaning; a day could include entire 
epochs of human history if a temporal correlation could be estab- 
lished. If one does not go beyond the first apparition, the following 
day another apparition comes forward. As I have said, "to go 
beyond" means "to identify with." 

The text exhorts: "Do not be weak. Do not become attached to 
this world." Whatever appears should be recognized as a mere 
reflection. The following propitiatory formula is given: "With every 
thought of fear or terror or awe for all apparitions set aside, may I 
recognize whatever visions appear as the reflections of mine own 
consciousness. . . . May I not fear the bands of peaceful and wrath- 

1 o 

ful deities, which are mine own thought-forms." 

If the deceased is not up to it, no matter how much time he 
spent during his earthly life in contemplation or in religious devo- 
tion, he will be overtaken by fear and anguish and turn his back to 
the splendor and to the power of those mirages, thus failing to 
achieve liberation. 

Since these projections make use of images that are rooted in 
the deepest recesses of the deceased's consciousness, the deceased 
will naturally be confronted by images and sights that correspond 
to his faith and to his tradition. Thus in the second bardo the 
Buddhist, the Christian, the Moslem, the shaman, and so forth, will 
all see the gods, the heavens, and the hells contemplated in their 
respective traditions. They become victims of an illusion thereby, 
since the task to be performed in this bardo consists in overcoming 
the particularism and the outwardness of these projected images, 
and in achieving a state of absolute self-identification typical of a 
reintegrated being. 19 Those who belong to the Tibetan Tantric tradi- 
tion will "see" the divinities that are worshiped in the more sophis- 
ticated versions of that tradition. They will come face to face with 
Vajrasattva, Ratnasambhava, Amithaba, Among hasiddhi, and so 
on. Concerning this, the text warns about the "seven stages of 

90 

ambuscade." The ambuscade consists in the objective appearance 
of all these divinities, which is caused by the lack of spiritual 
power, by the inner limitation, and by the "ignorance," which has 
not been completely overcome, on the part of the deceased. More 



199 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

specifically, the text indicates the "residues" (at the time one comes 
before each of those divinities, in each of the seven days) that are 
responsible for causing fear and for inducing the deceased not to 
identify with them. When one is confronted by Vajrasattva he still 
has residues of anger and of aversion. Before Ratnasambhava one 
experiences residues of attachment; before Amonghasiddhi resi- 
dues of envy and of hubris, and so on. 

If one does not pass the test represented by this divine, calm, 
and radiant world, the landscape will be transformed, almost as if 
a kaleidoscopic mutation were taking place. When fear becomes 
projected and objectified into divine characters, the calm and lumi- 
nous deities are followed by terrifying, wrathful, destructive, and 
unrestrained deities of the Kali and Shiva type - in reality they are 
the same deities that were previously encountered, this time with 

9 i 

their aspect and traits altered. Once again, the deceased is sup- 
posed to pass the identification test, which is now more difficult 
than ever. In order to pass this test, one should have practiced, 
during his lifetime, the cult of these deities in a Dionysian fashion. 
Only then will these deities be "unveiled" and one be able to realize 
the integration of spiritual traits that were known at the peak of 
earthly ritual and practices. Otherwise, one will once again back 
up and run away in terror. 

At this plane, and more so at the following plane (sidpa-bardo), 
the worst difficulty is caused by forces and propensities that sur- 
vive the dissolution of the human aggregate, acting now in an au- 
tomatic and "fatal" way. Therefore, from this phase on, it is as- 
sumed that since the distracting impulses are very powerful, this is 
the best time to remember the teachings contained in the Bardo 
Thodol. Passing the test at the second level would ensure the de- 
ceased "transfer" to the "vajra-bearers," which constitute the realms 
of pure forms. These realms, through the figures of the so-called 
dhyani-buddhas, bear a relation to the spiritual states that are real- 
ized in various phases of yogic dhyana. As a whole, these are the 
highest regions in the hierarchy of manifested worlds. In the Ti- 
betan language they are called og-min (in Sanskrit akanishtha-loka), 
which means "no more rebirth." These are regions in which there is 
no longer karmic necessity to assume human rebirth. They are ruled 
by the following law: "Those on the Bardo plane of the same level of 

9 "2 

knowledge or spiritual development see each other" where if they 
were on different levels, they would remain invisible to each other. 

The order of apparitions goes from absolute to relative, from 
direct to indirect, from informal to formal. The bottom line is that 
the I's attitude is solely responsible for producing the transforma- 

200 



Bardo: Actions After Death 

tions and the transfer of the contents of experience. The wrathful 
and unrestrained deities reflect and objectify the soul's apprehen- 
sion and its incapability of identifying with radiant and majestic 
deities. Thus, unless one is capable of identifying with the gods 
who appear in the new experience, 24 the terror that they generate 
will increase and the deceased will be induced to run away. This, 
unfortunately, exhausts the possibilities afforded in the second cross- 
roads, or bardo. 

At this point one enters into the third bardo, the sidpa-bardo, and 
is confronted by the "alternatives concerning rebirth." Since rebirth, 
at this point, cannot be avoided, it is a matter of choosing a samsaric 
birth rather than another. Those who have also failed the test of the 
second bardo are now drawn to the most conditioned forms of all. 
In these people the samsaric principle, made of desire and yearning 
for life, has proven to be stronger than the Shaivist principle. The 
samsaric principle is now directing one's development in the spirit- 
ual process. Those who during their lives followed in part the 
esoteric path, however, now have the power, if not to suspend this 
process, at least to direct it. We may compare their situation to that 
in which a person is trapped inside an automobile running at full 
speed; though that person may not be able to leave the vehicle or 
bring it to a full stop, at least he can still control it and avoid fatal 
turns and crevasses. The pashu, the ordinary mortal, does not have 
this advantage, since at death he ceased to exist as a true center of 
consciousness. 

This third bardo is characterized mainly by an intensification of 
the terrifying phenomenology that was present in the previous 
phase. One is confronted and afflicted by storms, hail, oppressive 
darkness, flames of entire jungles set on fire, roars of crumbling 
mountains, thunderbolts, the breaking of huge ocean waves, furies 
and demons, deserted landscapes, endless deserts, and so on. These 
are all mirages, reflections, specters, and hallucinations created by 
spiritual impulses, or better, by the interplay of karmic forces, 
which have taken the upper hand and which attempt to lead one's 
consciousness (by way of deception and intimidation) toward a 
given womb door. The process unfolds in such a fashion as to make 
a given womb door look like a safe haven. The unsuspecting spirit, 
lacking self-control, is tricked into it. The texts also mention three 
invisible precipices, which open wide before those who run away. 
The precipices, whose colors are white, red, and black, correspond 
to the three species of births, namely, the three forms of inferior 
samsaric manifestations. 

The second characteristic of this third bardo is the increasing 

201 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

awareness of being dead, accompanied by a strong desire to live 

9 5 

again - the form to which one is attached is a "desire body" - and 
by the perception of objects and beings living on various planes of 
existence. One's desire and reactions before the terrifying phantas- 
magoria must be dominated in this last series of otherworldly 
experiences. It is said that mind and memory here become dis- 
tinctly lucid - even in those in which they were obfuscated and 
obtuse - and that the "desire body" acquires the quality of a magi- 
cal body, since it may achieve whatever it conceives and yearns for. 
Because of the samsaric element, deceiving perspectives may arise, 
making attractive and desirable that which is not, and vice versa. 

9 f\ 

The text exhorts one to be aware of the "opposition," namely, of 
the presence of forces that are hostile to enlightenment. These may 
be characterized as counterinitiatory forces, which tend to domi- 
nate the very root of the samsaric element. 

"The boundary line between going upwards or going down- 

97 

wards is here now," the text adds. Also: "Abandoning all feelings 
of attraction and repulsion, with memory's heedfulness restraining 
the roving tendencies of the mind, apply thyself to the choosing of 

9 R 

the womb-door." 

Various techniques are indicated in order to avoid the choice of 
unfavorable wombs, which may turn out to be fatal to some people. 
The first technique is the method employed in the second bardo. 
One must come to realize that all apparitions are mere hallucina- 
tions and that, since the nature of one's being is emptiness, (shunyata), 
there is nothing to be feared, or nothing that threatening beings and 
wild forces can possibly hold on to. One must also think that these 
forces - including various demons, hells, heavenly judges, and so 
on - are just unreal forms, of the nature of echoes, dreams, mirages, 
or apparitions caused by magic. By inhibiting every irrational spiri- 
tual impulse, the automatic development of the karmic process is 
thus prevented. 29 

Concerning the entrance into a human womb, the Tibetan teach- 
ings almost resemble Freudian psychoanalysis. The being who yearns 
for a new life sees various couples engaging in the act of inter- 
course: 

If to be born as a male, attraction towards the mother and repul- 
sion towards the father, and if to be born as a female, attraction 
towards the father and repulsion towards the mother, together 
with a feeling of jealousy [for one or the other] which ariseth, will 

"3 A 

dawn upon thee. 



202 



Bardo: Actions After Death 

Through these feelings of attraction and repulsion, what takes 
place is the embodiment of a new embryo, whose gender depends 
on an identification with either the man or the woman. One there- 
fore should inhibit any desire or personal preference. "Holding the 
mind one-pointedly upon the resolution," one must be on guard in 
order to prevent the arising of any feeling of desire or repulsion 
usually induced by the supersensible vision. 

Another method has the same structure as the contemplative 
techniques that precede the Tantric sexual practices. One can avoid 
being drawn to a couple engaged in sexual intercourse by visualiz- 
ing man as a male deity and woman as his Shakti or as the Great 

O 1 

Mother. A third method consists in exorcising visualizations, a 
method that resembles some of the Jesuit spiritual exercises. When 
one experiences the tormenting fury of the elements and of de- 
mons, the thing to do is to immediately visualize a magical divinity 
of one's choice (Heruka, Hayagriva, or Vajrapani) as a powerful, 
perfect, and mighty god, capable of terrifying enemy forces and 
various ghosts. In this way the process is halted once again, thus 
allowing one freely to choose the womb door. "Since thou now 
possessest a slender supernatural power of foreknowledge, all the 
places of birth will be known to thee, one after another. Choose 
accordingly." 

Keeping in mind that a good womb-door may look unattractive, 
one should avoid any possible inclination or feeling of revulsion, 
so as not to be deceived. Even though a womb may appear good, 
do not be attracted; if it appear bad, have no repulsion towards 
it. To be free from repulsion and attraction, or from the wish to 
take or to avoid, to enter in the mood of complete impartiality, 
is the most profound of arts. Excepting only for the few who have 
had some practical experience [in psychic development], it is 
difficult to get rid of the remnants of the disease of evil propen- 
sities. 33 

Here, too, it is clear that the capability of mastering one's destiny 
in the afterlife implies the presence, in the postmortem states, of the 
yogic characteristics of apathy, detachment, and a cold and majestic 
magic quality. It must be possible to evoke and to actualize these 
characteristics in order to be in complete control of oneself during 
this succession of free forces and images, just like somebody who 
keeps calm and in control of the situation under dangerous circum- 
stances in order to choose the best course of action. Also, it helps 



203 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

to remember one's "secret name, which was received at the mo- 
ment of initiation"; in fact, one appears before the "Lord of Death" 
with that particular name. 

In the third bardo (the last of the three possible postmortem 
indeterminate phases), it is possible to achieve, if not liberation, at 
least a certain degree of freedom in the conditioned world. The 
choice that determines whether one is to continue or to complete 
the "great work" in the next existence is contingent on the degree 
of "recollection" that has been preserved. This case is similar to that 
of an individual who already enjoys privileged predispositions 
toward what I have called "natural dignity," and who is more or 
less aware of his prenatal background. 

A case apart is that of those who take on a body and reappear 
in the human world of their own free will and not because they 
have missed the opportunity in the three bardos by failing to pass 
the afterlife tests, or on the basis of various determinisms. Gener- 
ally speaking, these "descents" are mostly associated to a specific 
visible or invisible mission. In some extreme cases, one takes on a 
nirmana-kaya as a mayavi-rupa (see Chapter XII). In these cases what 
becomes manifest is not a particular individuality, but rather a 
force from above. The Tibetan doctrine of the so-called tulku claims 
that this force may be "reborn" in several beings at the same time, 
in the same way that a flame can light several wicks. The initiatory, 
regal, and pontifical pluralis maiestatis "We" may be a distant and 
obscure reference to this. 

Those who share the metaphysical views of Mahayana Bud- 
dhism, which takes the doctrine of nonduality (Advaita) to the 
extreme consequence of abolishing the distinction between nirvana 
and samsara, will consider these views to be relative as well. 

The Mind is the Cosmos. To the Enlightened One, this apparent 
duality has no existence, since neither samsara nor nirvana are two 
things apart from individualism, but merely two aspects of One, 
which is the All-Knowledge, All-Wisdom. Hence, as the texts 
teach, samsara and nirvana are, in this occult sense, said to be in- 
separable. Duality is present in appearance, but not in essence. 34 



204 



Appendix Two 

SHAKTISM AND 
THE WORSHIPERS OF LOVE 



Some aspects of Hindu Shaktism, especially in the evocative dimen- 
sion, are somewhat similar to the inner, esoteric aspects of medieval 
European movements such as the "Worshipers of Love," to which 
the celebrated Italian poet Dante Alighieri belonged. I think it is 
worthwhile to mention some of these analogies. I have dealt at 
greater length with the initiatory experiences of the Worshipers of 
Love in another work of mine. 1 

We are all familiar with the role that women played in trouba- 
dour songs and chivalric literature, in the "Courts of Love," and in 
the works of numerous poets who called themselves Worshipers of 
Love. In the love stories of contemporary literature, however, the 
esoterism that is partially present in it has been ignored and at times 
underdeveloped, owing to the academic and profane mentality of 
the authors. The emphasis that writers such as Aroux and G. Rossetti 
placed on the hidden meaning of several poems and on their mul- 
tivalent language went unheeded. In Italy a fundamental work 
such as Luigi Valli's Dante e il linguaggio segreto deifedeli d 1 amove, 
written with a critical and analytical precision, has been totally 
ignored by the academic establishment. 

The main point I am trying to make is as follows: It cannot be 



205 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

denied that there are cases in which the women alluded to in this 
kind of literature, which was bent on exalting and celebrating them, 
were "sublimations," personified allegorical figures, and theologi- 
cal abstractions. No matter what name these women had, or what 
they looked like, they were all representations of the one archetypal 
woman, whose meaning and function, generally speaking, corre- 
spond to the Tantric Shakti's, or to the initiatory/initiating woman's. 
If these women really existed, they were celebrated not by virtue of 
their historical existence, but only because they somehow incorpo- 
rated or served as the foundation of that Woman, who was con- 
ceived as the enlightening principle ("Holy Wisdom") of the Wor- 
shiper of Love's transcendent vivification and immortality. The 
analogy, however, must be circumscribed to what I have called the 
platonic plane, or to the "subtle" employment of women in Tantrism. 
I do not think that the West made much progress on this line. For 
one thing, women in the West were never employed in rituals such 
as the Tantric panchatattva, in the course of which one has sex with 
a woman; this woman has been transformed into Shakti, with the 
purpose of evoking and of awakening in her the "absolute woman." 

Love has a double meaning in what I repute to be the most 
significative aspects of that literature. The first meaning concerns 
immortality and the "deathless" element. This was clearly ex- 
pounded by Jacques de Baisieux, who interpreted the word amor as 
a-mors, literally "deathless." This author went as far as to associate 
amor with the Hindu amrita, the "deathless" nectar (ambrosia), 
which is spoken of in various Hindu texts. The second meaning 
deals with the rapture that "woman" kindles in man. This rapture 
is believed to have ecstatic effects, leading to the experience of 
immortality, and to the achievement of well-being (when "well- 
being" is understood as salvation, we may associate this term to the 
Western equivalent of the Hindu notion of liberation). According to 
the first meaning, we may see how in the literary productions of the 
Worshipers of Love, personified Love has Shaivist traits, which are 
radically different from those sentimental and stereotypical images 
of various Cupids armed with bow and arrows. 

This is also the case in Dante's works. Dante calls Love "glori- 
ous Lord" and puts these words in his mouth: "I am as the center 
of a circle, to which the parts of the circumference stand in equal 
relation; but thou not so" (La vita nuova [The New Life] 12:22). 
"Love," unlike ordinary men, is characterized by "centrality," sta- 
bility, and immutability. In Tantrism these characteristics are attrib- 
uted to the Shaivist principle rather than to the Shaktic principle. 



206 



Shaktism and the Worshipers of Love 

Thus Love may look scary and even terrifying to an ephemeral and 
transient being, precisely because of its centrality and transcen- 
dence. Love sends "woman" forward and even offers her up to the 
initiatory experience. A word of caution is in order, however: this 
is a risky experience, bordering on death, since the alternative is 
either to become awakened or to receive a deadly blow. This is why 
Love says, "Flee if to perish be irksome to thee" (15:22). Dante 
himself says, "suddenly Love appeared to me, the memory of whose 
being maketh me shudder" (3:58-59). In one particular vision, Love 
appears "in the figure of a lord of fearful aspect" (3:20), which is the 
inner ruler, and says: "I am thy Lord." Dante goes on to say: 

In his arms methought I saw one sleeping, naked, save that she 
seemed to me wrapped lightly in a crimson drapery; whom gaz- 
ing at very intently, I knew to be the lady of the salutation, who 
the day before had deigned to salute me. And in one of his hands 
methought he held a thing that was all aflame; and methought 
he said to me these words: Vide Cor tuum [Behold thy heart!]." 

The woman's "salutation," in the literature of the Worshipers 
of Love, has a coded meaning based on the double meaning of the 
terms salutation and salvation. 4 It is said: "Let him who merits not 
salvation [liberation], never hope to have her company [Beatrice's 
or the woman's]" (8:54). The woman who extends the salutation is 
the same woman who bestows salvation, or better, who propitiates 
a crisis and an experience that leads to salvation. Thus Dante 
speaks of the effects of a salutation, that often go far beyond his 
own strength. After all, the sight of the woman almost causes one 
to die. Dante says about this: "I have set my feet in that region of 
life beyond which one cannot go with intent to return" (14:41). And 
more specifically: "And whoso should endure to stay and behold 
her, would become a noble thing or else would die: and when she 
findeth one worthy to behold her, he proveth her virtue; for this 
befalleth him, that she giveth him salutation." 5 

The general theme of the Worshipers of Love is that, as in 
initatory Shaktism, "love" and "woman" actualize something that 
is found in a man in potency or dormancy. This theme corresponds, 
in Aristotle's philosophy, to the "potential intellect" (since it is not 
a given, but exists only as a possibility) and, in Tantrism, to the 
Shaivist element, which prior to intercourse with the "woman" is 
inactive and useless. Once this element is awakened, it prevails 
over anything that is human and samsaric. At the opening of The 



207 



THE YOGA OF POWER 

New Life Dante mentions the experience of "contact." He talks about 
the apparition of the "glorious lady of my mind," who "was called 
Beatrice by many who did not know what to call her" (II, 4; in other 
words, they did not know what this experience consisted of). This 
marks the beginning of a radical transformation of the human 
being: At that point I verily declare that the vital spirit which 
dwelleth in the most secret chamber of the heart [i.e., the atman, which 
the Upanishads localize in precisely the same spot, conceived as 
individual principle = jivatma] began to tremble so mightily that it 
was horribly apparent in the least of my pulses, and trembling, it 
said these words: "Behold a god stronger than /, who coming shall rule 

„6 

over me. 

What is announced is the awakening of the inner ruler, who is 
"the lord on the throne." The "animal spirit," which is here equated 
with the vital principle, is astonished at the incipient transforma- 
tion: "Now has appeared your bliss." Finally, the "natural spirit," 
which could be equated with the samsaric nature, begins to weep 
and finally says: "Alas, wretched, because often from now on I shall 
be hindered." In other words, it realizes that it will no longer 
control the Worshiper of Love's being. Dante goes on to say: "From 
thenceforth I say that Love held lordship over my soul, which was 
early bounden unto him." 

In the previously mentioned passage the "woman" is related to 
the "knowledge of the heart," and to something that is "all aflame," 
as if it were the center of a magic, life-giving fire. All of this helps 
us to appreciate the deepest meaning of the title Dante gave to his 
book, namely, The New Life. Even the sleeping woman, wrapped up 
in a crimson drapery, may be a highly symbolic figure. She could 
be equated with the "woman" found in the bloodstream, who 
induces the Tantric divya to claim that he has no need for external 
women. 

The initiatory experience of the Worshipers of Love and of 
analogous Western movements, as well as of the Shaktic adept, is 
based on these points. Love induces a deep crisis, and it awakens 
a power that almost "kills" the subject, thus activating a superior 
principle hidden in man. The "woman," in turn, generates a new 
being, causing a new hierarchy of the powers of human nature, to 
be formed; this is "salvation," and the principle of a new life. 

It is obviously difficult to determine in which practical existen- 
tial situations all these plans have been successfully implemented. 
In such cases what must have taken place is a kind of evocation of 
and a contact with the supersensous, "subtle" plane, although a 



208 



Shaktism and the Worshipers of Love 

real woman may actually have facilitated the contact. Probably, as 
in certain aspects of Tantric practice, specific states may have been 
induced. In these states an exasperated desire, which was rendered 
spiritual through the inhibition of every material discharge, eventu- 
ally consumed itself by flowing into a superior experience. This has 
led some to talk about the "mystery" of medieval platonic love. It 
is important to show another similarity. In the Tantric ritual a man, 
for a long period, which has been divided into three phases, must 
spend the nights in the same room with the young woman he has 
appointed to be his Shakti, and must even sleep with her, without 
possessing her physically. This, I think, represents the preliminary 
level of the "subtle intercourse." Not among the Worshipers of 
Love, but among the knights dedicated to the cult of the "woman," 
the ultimate trial, called asag, consisted in spending a night in bed 
with the woman totally naked, without any sexual act; this was 
done not to implement chastity, but to increase the desire for her. 

The term "metaphysics" in the title of this book needs to be defined, 
lor it will be used here with two distinct meanings. The first is 
commonly employed in philosophy, where metaphysics is 
understood as the search for first principles and fundamental 
meanings. The metaphysics of sex will therefore be the study of what 
from an absolute point of view is signified by the sexes and their 
interaction. There has been little precedence for this kind of 
research. After mentioning Plato and leaving aside certain hints 
found in mystical writings of the Renaissance — and also ignoring the 
theories of Boehme and some heterodox mystics influenced by him, 
up to and including Franz von Baader — only with Schopenhauer do 
we find a precursor. After him, we can only cite Weininger and, to 
n certain extent, Berdyaev and Klagcs. In the modern era and above 
nil in our own day, studies of the problem of the sexes from 
iinihropological, biological, sociological, eugenic, and psycho- 
analytic points of view have multiplied endemically; in fact, a 
neologism, "sexology," has been created to label research of this 
kind. But none of (his has any relation to the metaphysics of sex. In 
I his field, as in every other, our contemporaries have shown no 
interest in the search for ultimate meanings, or if they have, die 
search has appeared inconclusive and uninteresting; rather, they 
have thought to attain more important and serious knowledge by 
keeping to an empirical and more strictly human level, whenever 
their attention has not been focused on the pathological by-products 
of sex. 

The same is mainly true of the writers, past and present, who have 
dealt with love rather than specifically with sex itself. For the most 
psirt, they have kept to the field of psychology and, within that, to a 
general analysis of feelings. Even the writings of such authors as 
Stendhal, Bourget, Balzac, Solovieff, and D. H. Lawrence have little 
lo do with the deepest meanings of sex. Moreover, references to 
love in view of the general meaning of that word nowadays* and 
given t he sentimental and romantic disintegration in the experiences 
of (he majority of people-— were bound to create ambiguities and to 
limit research io a narrow and rather commonplace field. Only here 
;iikI (here and, one mijdil s:iv-, alums! by ehanre have such writers 



2 The Metaphysics of Sex 

approached the true depth or the metaphysical dimension of love in 
its relationship with sex. 

But in this study, metaphysics will also have a second meaning, 
one that is not unrelated to the word's origin since "metaphysics" 
literally means the science of that which goes beyond the physical. In 
our research, this "beyond the physical" will not cover abstract 
concepts or philosophical ideas, but rather that which may evolve 
from an experience that is not merely physical, but 
transpsychological and transphysiologicah We shall achieve this 
through the doctrine of the manifold states of being and through an 
anthropology that is not restricted to the simple soul- body 
dichotomy, but is aware of "subtle" and even transcendental 
modalities of human consciousness. Although foreign to 
contemporary thought, knowledge of this kind formed an integral 
part of ancient learning and of the traditions of varied peoples. 

From this context we shall take our reference points for a 
metaphysics of sex, and we shall verify the possibility of erotic 
experience leading to a displacement of the boundaries of the ego and 
to the emergence of profound modes of consciousness. It has been 
observed that a different rhythm is established in every intense 
experience of eros, which invests and transports or suspends the 
normal faculties of an individual and may open vistas onto a different 
world. But those who are the subjects of such an experience almost 
always lack the discernment and sensibility to comprehend anything 
beyond the emotions and feelings that affect them; they have no basis 
for self-orientation. 

Scientists who try to investigate sexuality by studying others 
rather than themselves are in error, for they cannot approach the 
depth of the metaphysics of sex* Only the lost sacred science is able to 
provide the necessary references for investigating the potential 
dimensions of the experience of eros. Thus we lack the indispensable 
knowledge needed to identify in terms of reality the possible content 
of thai which is generally assumed to be unreal. Without this 
knowledge, man can only take eros to the exalted borders of the 
human, of his passion and his feeling. Only poetry, lyrics, and 
idealized romanticism are created, while everything else is 
eradicated. 

With these observations, we have in view the profane erotic field 
which is roughly the only sexual experience known to men and 
women of the West today and which alone is taken into account by 
psychologists and sexologists. It may be that (he majority of people 
will not recognize the deepest meanings ih:ii wexhall ascribe to love 
in general and even to I he midc at I dial expresses and ends it. 
liarhusse has described llie fail as one in whu h "a manifold anil 



Introduction 3 

monstrous being is formed" and man and woman "seek to humiliate 
and sacrifice everything that is beautiful within them." It may be that 
I lie majority will think us capricious and arbitrary, and consider our 
interpretations abstruse and hermetic. This will only seem so to one 
who assumes his own limited experience as absolute. But the world 
of eros did not begin today, and a glance at history, ethnology, the 
history of religions, mysticism, folklore, and mythology will reveal 
I lie existence of erotic forms arid sexual experiences in which deeper 
possibilities were recognized. 

References of this kind, well documented in the traditions of 
diverse civilizations, will suffice to refute the idea that the 
metaphysics of sex is merely a concept. The conclusion must be quite 
different. We would say rather that, as if through atrophy, certain 
aspects of eros have become inactive almost to the point where they 
tire no longer discernible and only their traces and symptoms remain 
in the sexual love of the present time. Thus, in order to make them 
evident, an integration is needed, a procedure like the passage from 
the differential to the integral in mathematics. Indeed it is not likely 
1 1 1 a I in the ancient forms of eros, which often belonged to sacred rites 
or initiation ceremonies, something was invented and added that did 
not correspond to human experience; nor is it likely that a use was 
made of such experience for which it was completely unfit either 
essentially or in principle. It is much more likely that with the 
passing of time this experience deteriorated, being impoverished, 
obscured, or hidden in the vast majority of men and women 
belonging to a phase of civilization oriented toward materialism. It 
has rightly been said that "the fact that humanity makes love 
foolishly and unconsciously, as it does almost everything, does not 
prevent love's mysterious nature from upholding the dignity that 
belongs to it." 1 Moreover, it is useless to object that certain 
possibilities and meanings of eros can only be witnessed, if at all, in 
exceptional cases. It is precisely these exceptions of today which give 
UK i he key to understanding the deep, potential., unconscious content 
uf lite unexceptional and the profane. Although Mauclair only 
considered the profane and natural character of passion, yet he said 
wuh reason: "In love, acts are carried out without thinking, and its 
mystery is evident only to a tiny minority of human beings . ♦ . In 
I lie numberless crowd of beings having a human countenance there 
me vei v few men; and in this select company there are very few who 
i in i understand I lie meaning of love." 2 In this, as in all other spheres, 
Miiiisiics are worthless. Such a criterion can be left to the trivial 
inn hods of a Kinsey. In our research, it is the exceptional that 
provides the norm al an ideal level. We can now mark out the fields 
ih.il unr investigation will cover. The I irsl will be lhal of erotic-sexual 



^ 



4 The Metaphysics of Sex 

experience in general; namely, the profane love that any ordinary 
man or woman may know. We shall look in this field for "intervening 
signs" that will take us beyond the simple physical, sentimental fact. 
We can start with a number of constant expressions, the universal 
language of lovers, and recurring behavioral patterns. The 
stereotypical and trivial, considered in a new light, will provide some 

interesting clues. 

As for the phenomenology of profane love, further material can be 
gleaned from novelists and playwrights. Their works nowadays deal 
almost exclusively with love and sex. We do not deny that such 
productions may have a certain worth as evidence and as "human 
documentation," for usually a personal experience that has actually 
been lived constitutes the raw material of artistic creation. And what 
such artistic creation presents in the feelings, dialogues, and actions 
of its characters should not be dismissed as mere fiction or 
imagination. It may highlight through integration, amplification, 
and intensification the personal experience of the author, however 
incomplete. By this standard, art and the novel can provide further 
material that in itself may be considered objective and that often 
concerns already differentiated forms of eros. 

Our researchmects with special difficulties in a sphere important 
for our investigation: the states that develop at the height of erotic- 
sexual experience. Literature offers little help here. Until recently 
there were the taboos of puritanism, and now in the most daring 
modern novels, the banal and vulgar predominate over any useful 
material . Pornographic literature is also a scanty source. Produced to 
titillate the reader, it is dreadfully squalid not only in the facts and 
scenes described, but in its essence. 

In the direct collection of material, we encounter a twofold 
problem, both subjective and objective. The problem is subjective 
because people are reluctant to speak even to their partners, let alone 
to strangers, about their experience in the most thrilling moments of 
sexual intimacy. It is objective because these moments often coincide 
with such reduced states of consciousness that people sometimes 
forget what they felt, said, or did. We have indeed been able to 
ascertain that the ecstatic or maenadic moments of the heights of 
sexuality often provoke interruptions of consciousness and are 
phases "from which lovers return to themselves as if stunned or 
confused by paroxysmal feeling and emotion. 

In principle, neurologists and gynecologists would be very well 
placed to gather useful material, if only they were trained or 
interested- But unfortunately this is nol 1 he case. The posilivist 
school of the last century wont so far as to publish photographs of 
female jienilnlia in oidci to establish likenesses between delinquent 



Introduction 5 

women, prostitutes, and women belonging to savage races. But 
apparently no one has shown any interest in presenting introspective 
evidence about the innermost experience of sex. Furthermore, 
papers on sexological research with scientific pretension are in 
general ludicrously incompetent; for here firsthand understanding of 
the experience is the sine qua nan. Havelock Ellis rightly remarked 
that "the women who write books about these problems in all 
seriousness and sincerity are often the very last persons to whom one 
should turn as representatives of their sex; those who know most are 
those who write least." 3 We should say furthermore that they are 
I hose who have not written anything at all, and the same applies, of 
course, to a great extent in the case of men. 

Lastly, as far as the field of profane eros is concerned, our 
investigation is affected very little by contemporary psychoanalysis, 
which has created a sort of fixed concept of sex and "libido." 
Psychoanalysis can provide us with only a few useful indications here 
and there; its research in general is in disarray from the outset 
because its prejudices distort the concept of the human being. 
I urthermore, since psychoanalysis has emphasized the subpersonal 
primordial ism of sex by applying a degrading inversion, it is 
necessary to oppose it with a metaphysical perspective. The basic 
purpose of this book is to provide that opposition. 

The above concerns the sphere of ordinary sexuality whether 
differentiated or not. A second and much more important sphere 
embraces the traditions that have recognized a sacred nature in sex, a 
magical ritual or mystic use of the sexual union and of sexual orgies, 
sometimes performed in collective and institutional forms as in 
seasonal festivals, holy prostitution, sacred marriages, and the like. 
In this respect sufficient material is available, and its retrospective 
nature does not in any way lessen its worth. Here, too, the validity of 
our research depends on having or not having adequate knowledge to 
li i rive at a correct interpretation. We must not treat this evidence 
with the neutral interest that a historian of religion or an ethnologist 
Wiiu Id show toward museum pieces. 

This second dimension, with its phenomenology relating to a no 
longer profane sexuality, also contains a division corresponding to 
i lu- splii between the exoteric and the esoteric, between general 
disjoins and secret doctrines. Various erotic cults, including the 
well known popular worship of Bacchus and Tantrism, not only 
in of'iii/cd the most profound dimension of sex but even formulated 
leehni»|iKs whose purposes were often openly and consciously 
itiilhilory; a particular method of sexual union was enacted to induce 
Kpecial forms nf ecstasy and loohiain an anticipation of the absolute, 
lice horn restrictions, I )oeuiiieui:tiioii lor I his special sphere also 






6 Th e Me t ap hy s ics of S ex 

exists, and the obvious agreement between the doctrines and 
methods of the various traditions is highly significant. 

Both the reality and the meaning of the metaphysics of sex will 
become evident if we regard these different spheres as parts of one 
whole, integrated and mutually illuminating. The special knowledge 
only revealed to those united in love will be restored to the vaster 
whole, of which everything in principle is a part. Owing to special 
circumstances, this present work will form little more than an 
outline. 1 have already had the occasion to write about the esoteric 
doctrine of androgyny and about the sexual practices of which that 
doctrine is the basis. I would have liked to obtain additional material 
on profane love, but apart from the above-mentioned difficulties, a 
fortuitous personal situation prevented me from gathering more 
information. However, there will be enough here to develop our 
theme. 

Sex in the World Today 

Before we embark on our subject, some remarks about the age in 
which this book has been written are in order. Everyone knows the 
part played by sex in our present civilization, and indeed there is a 
kind of obsession with it. In no other era have woman and sex taken 
the front of the stage in such a manner. They are dominant in a 
thousand forms in literature, theater, cinema, advertising, and the 
whole of contemporary practical life. Woman is presented in a 
thousand forms to attract man and stupefy him sexually. The 
striptease, wherein a woman undresses little by little, shedding ever 
more intimate garments until the bare minimum is reached, keeps 
the onlookers in a state of tension suited to thai "complex oi 
expectation" or state of suspense which a full, immediate, and 
shameless display of nakedness would destroy. Thus the striptease 
epitomizes the most recent decades of Western civilization under the 
sign of sex. The most fascinating and exciting female types are no 
longer known, as they were in the past, only in the restricted areas of 
the countries in which they live. Actresses, celebrities, and models, 
carefully selected and made to catch the eye in every possible way 
through an incessant barrage of media, become the burning focus 
of a sensualism worldwide in scope. Their zone of influence is 
collective and does not exclude that social strata which in other times 
used to be restricted within the bounds of a normal and soothing 

sexuality. 

The cerebral nature of this modern universal worship of sex should 
be emphasized. We are not dealing here, as was I he case in other eras, 
with more violent impulses thai are shown nulv <>" Mir physical plane 
and give way lo an exuberant, iiiiitiltihilcil sexual lile or even 10 



Introduction 



7 



licentiousness. Nowadays sex has, to quite an extent, permeated the 
psychic field and caused a constant, insistent gravitation toward 
woman and love. Thus we have sensualism as a basic influence on 
this mental level with two outstanding characteristics: First is a 
widespread and chronic excitement, almost independent of every 
concrete, physical satisfaction because it persists as psychic 
excitement; and second, partly as an outcome of the first 
characteristic, this sensualism can even coexist with apparent 
chastity. As to the first of these points, it is true that people think 
much more about sex today than they did in the past. When a free 
expression of physical love was more strictly limited by custom, we 
might expect to find precisely that mental stupefaction which instead 
is typical of our own times. As to the second point, certain female 
forms of sexual anesthesia and depraved chastity related to what 
psychoanalysis calls the autistic varieties of libido are highly 
significant. An example is the type of modern woman whose main 
interests are exhibitionism, the accentuation of everything that may 
make her alluring to man, and the worship of her own body. Such 
women derive from this a vicarious pleasure which they prefer to the 
specific pleasure obtained from real sexual experience. The outcome 
lor them is lack of sensitivity and in certain cases even neurotic 
denial. 4 These types fan the flames of chronic wantonness that is so 
widespread today. 

Tolstoy once had occasion to say to Gorki: "For the French a 
woman comes before anything else. They are a weak, degraded 
people. Doctors say that all consumptives are sensual." If we leave 
( lie French aside, it remains true that a universal and feverish interest 
in sex and woman is the mark of every twilight period and that this 
phenomenon today is among the many signs that this epoch is the 
n-rmmal phase of a regressive process. Classical antiquity formulated 
an analogy with the human organism: In man, the head, the breast, 
anil I he lower parts of the body correspond respectively to the seats of 
inlcllectual life, of spiritual and heroic courage, and finally of 
nourishment and sex. Corresponding to this are three human types 
and, we may add, three types of civilization. It is clear that today by 
regression we are living in a civilization whose predominant interest 
Is neither intellectual, spiritual, nor heroic, nor even directed to the 
hifthcr forms of emotion. Rather the subpersonal — sex and the 
(icily arc idolized; and therefore the unfortunate saying of a poet 
nay become a reality: Hunger and love will shape history. Hunger is 
lu- chief cause of social disaster and economic strife. The emphasis 
Hivrn lo woman, love, and sex is its counterpart. 

I'm iIut evidence is provided by the ancient Hindu tradition of the 
loin :\yyu oi ilir world in ils Tannic formulation. A (itndaiucnlal 



8 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



characteristic of the last or so-called Dark Age (Kali Yuga) is the 
awakening and ultimate dominance of Kali, who stamps the epoch 
with her sign. We shall have reason to speak of Kali later on; in one of 
her main aspects she is the goddess not only of destruction but also of 
desire and sex. In this respect the Tantric doctrine formulates an 
ethic? and indicates a way that in preceding epochs would have been 
censured and kept secret: the transmutation of poison into medicine. 
In considering the problem of our civilization, we hold no illusions 
for such a prospect. The reader will see later on to what levels these 
possibilities relate. For the present it is enough to establish the 
universal feverishness of sex as one of the signs of the regressive 
nature of the present era. The natural counterpart of this universal 
feverishness is gynocracy, that tacit preeminence of everything 
conditioned directly or indirectly by the female element; in another 
book, too, I have indicated the varieties of recourse to the female 
element in our civilization. 5 

This study will highlight the opposition of the metaphysics of sex 
to established, conventional viewpoints, and this contrast will make 
even more apparent the inner fall of modern man. 



l 



Eros and Sexual Love 



The Evolutionary Prejudice 

The meaning given to sex will depend on how one views human 
nature in general, on the particular system of anthropology adopted. 
An anthropology that recognizes in man the dignity of a being who is 
more than merely natural will necessarily oppose a system that 
considers man to be just one among many species of animals and 
which, as H. L. Philp has said, writes "Natural Selection" with 
capital letters, just as we do the name of God. 

Since its inception, sexology, in monographs having scientific 
pre lens ions, has been influenced by the legacy of nine teen ih-century 
materialism, which took as its premises the theories of Darwin and 
biology — theories that in our opinion promulgate a distorted and 
mutilated concept of man. They tell us that man sprang in the 
beginning from the animal by "natural evolution," and they have 
described man's sexual and erotic life in terms of an extension of 
unimal instincts. They explain the ultimate, positive basis of human 
eroticism by the merely biological purpose of the species. 

The modern tendency to explain the higher by the lower, the 
Inn nan by the physiological and animal, exists even in the field of 
pHvchology. Psychoanalysis has contributed its own sophisticated 
viewpoint but still confirms the same tendency. Indeed, 
psychoanthropology insists on a prepersonal and subpersonal 
piemen i (the world of the unconscious, of instinct, of the Freudian id 
-it id the archaic archetypes that take us back to our primitive 
unccsiry) as the basis of man. Psychoanalysts assume they can 
i< x plain everything in man that has previously been deemed to form 
till independent psychic life, especially love and sex, within this 
framework. 

Our premises are totally different. Our starting point will be not 
lilt* modern theory of evolution but the traditional doctrine of 
Involution. We do not believe that man is derived from the ape by 
M volt it ion. We believe that ape is derived from the man by involution. 
We n^rer with l)c Maistrc that savage peoples are not primitive 
peoples, in the sense of original peoples, but rather the degenerat- 
ing remains of more ancient races that have disappeared. We concur 
With llic various researchers (Kohlbrnggc, Marconi, Dacquc, 






1 The Metaphysics of Sex 

Westenhofer , and Adloff) who have rebelled against the evolutionary 
dogma, asserting that animal species evince the degeneration oi 
primordial man's potential. These unfulfilled or deviant potentials 
manifest as by-products of the true evolutionary process that man has 
led since the beginning. For this reason, ontogenesis, the biological 
history of the individual, does not repeat in any way the process of 
phylogenesis, the presumed evolutionary history of the species, but 
passes again through some eliminated possibilities. It stops to 
roughly outline them and then moves beyond, subordinating these 
possibilities to the superior and specifically human principle, which 
is defined and fulfilled little by little in the development of the 
individual. 

Therefore, we shall not consider human sexuality as an extension 
of animal sexuality; we shall rather explain animal sexuality— in 
beasts and as it may sometimes appear in man as well—as the fall and 
regression of an impulse that does not belong to biology. From a 
metaphysical point of view, the instinct for reproduction and the 
very "survival of the species" do not in any way represent the primary 
fact; they are mere derivatives. 

Love and Sex 

The object of our investigation is not sex in its raw and physical 
aspects. Since we arc concerned essentially with man, the wider and 
more complex phenomenon of love enters somewhat into the 
question. But a natural restriction arises. It is possible to speak of 
love in a generic sense: love of parents, love of beauty, love oi 
country, maternal love, and so on. An ideal or sentimental concept of 
love exists when love is felt softly as simple affection in the normal 
interaction of the sexes or in intellectual affinity. Therefore we shall 
confine our subject to the narrower concept of sexual love, The 
human experience of this love, which may include mental, 
emotional, moral, and even intellectual factors, supersedes the 
biological but nevertheless centers in the actual union of two beings 
of opposite sex in coitus. 

Various forms of human love have been distinguished. Stendhal* s 
famous distinction identifies passion-love, aesthetic love, physical 
love, and love based on vanity. A distinction of this kind is not very 
useful, for it is based on peripheral elements, which, if predominant, 
would eliminate the possibility of deep experience. Actually, it is 
only a partial distinction between differing aspects of the erotic 
phenomenon taken as a whole. The love with which our research is 
concerned is essentially passion-love, the only type thai deserves the 
name of love. Bourgef s definition may be satisfactory: "There exists 
a mental ami physical stiile during which everything is iiiiuulkd in 



Eros and Sexual Love 



11 



us, in our thoughts, in our hearts, and in our senses. ... I call that 
state love." 1 Physical love in Stendhal's sense may appear as a 
separate variety of love only if we assume a process of dissociation 
and a change to a primitive state . It is normally an integrating part of 
passion-love. Taken on its own, it forms the lower limit of passion- 
love, but it always retains that intrinsic quality. 

In general it is important here to establish the fundamental 
difference between our concept and that of the positivists. The 
difference lies not in the physical or biological interpretation, but in 
i he root meaning of sexual union; for otherwise we both see in that 
union the essential end and conclusion of every experience based on 
mutual attraction between the sexes, the center of gravity of all love. 

Love can also include ideal affinities, devotion and affection, the 
spirit of sacrifice, deep manifestations of feeling; but all of these 
represent, from an existential point of view, something else or 
something incomplete wherever there is not present, as a 
counterpart, that "physical" attraction resulting in the union of 
bodies and the trauma oi coitus. At this point we have the precipitate, 
1 1 ic movement to the act, and the consummation (the natural terminus 
ad quern or end purpose) which is the point and purpose of the erotic 
experience. When the sexual impulse is aroused by "physical" 
sit traction, the deepest layers of our being, layers existentially 
elementary by comparison to simple sentiment, are moved. The 
highest form of love between man and woman is, in a sense, unreal 
without that short circuit, the coarsest form of which is the climax of 
the sexual orgasm; and it is precisely this which encompasses the 
transcendental and nonindividual dimension of sex. It is true that 
Tin ionic love can also take us beyond the individual through 
continuous and absolute self-denial, but only as a spiritual 
disposition. It can bear fruit in a different way, but not in the actual 
experience, in a true fission of the being. Let us say it once more: The 
[depths of a being, in the sphere were are discussing, are reached and 
[moved only by the actual union of the sexes. 

On the other hand, the fact that sympathy, tenderness, and other 
forms of immaterial love are often connected to sexuality and often 
represent only sublimations, transpositions, or regressive, infantile 
deviations, can be favorably ascribed to psychoanalytical research 
,iikI must not be overlooked. 

We therefore oppose the concept that represents as progress and 
em it limeni the passage from sexual love to domestic love consisting 
mainly ofaflcciion and social feeling, based on family life, offspring, 
iniil all the rest. For this represents existentially not a plus but a 
minus and ;i sharp drop in level. In such forms, the contact with 
ptinioidi:il lutves, however dim lo hefcin with, is lost or kept only by 



12 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



reflex action. As we shall sec, a love conducted at this level, at the 
Nietzschean "too human" level, is only a substitute. From a 
metaphysical point of view, man creates with it an illusory solution 
for that need for confirmation and ontological completeness which 
constitutes the essential and unconscious basis of the sexual impulse, 
Schiller wrote: "Passion disappears; love must remain." In that we 
can only see a last resource to one of the dramas of the human 
condition; for only passion can lead to that "dazzling moment of 
unity." 

Eros and the Instinct for Reproduction 

The considerations set forth in the preceding section are intended to 
show the intensive level of the erotic experience, excluding broken or 
incomplete forms of that experience. Apart from that, just as we have 
taken up a position opposed to the sexuality propounded by the bio- 
logists, in order to avoid any ambiguity, we shall now oppose those 
who, as if renewing the attacks of Rousseau against "culture" on 
behalf of "nature," took the trouble to proclaim a new naturalistic 
religion of sex and the flesh , The best-known exponent of this school 
was D. H. Lawrence. His point of view was summarized in the words 
of Campion in Aldous Huxley's Point Counter Point. Campion states 
that the natural appetites and desires of men are not what make them 
so bestial: "No, bestial is not the right word because it implies an 
offense to animals* — let us say: too humanly wicked and 
vicious. ... It is the imagination, the intellect, the principles, the 
education, the tradition. Leave the instincts to themselves and they 
will do very little evil," And so the majority of men are considered to 
be like perverts, far from the central norm of humanity both when 
they excite the "flesh" and deny it for the soul. Lawrence added the 
following: "My religion is belief in the blood and the flesh, which are 
wiser than the intellect." 2 It is strange that Lawrence also wrote 
words that are not trivial, such as these: "God the Father, the 
inscrutable, the unknowable, we bear Him in our flesh, we find Him 
in woman. She is the door by which we come in and go forth. In her 
we return to the Father, just like those who, blind and unconscious, 
were present at the transfiguration." Moreover, he had certain 
correct intuitions regarding the union that is fulfilled through the 
blood. However, in spite of this view, he fell into an avoidable 
ambiguity and made an ideal of salvation out of a mutilation. Peladan 
was right when he said: "Realism is worth no more in love than in art. 
On an erotic level imitation of nature becomes imitation of the 
beast." 3 When taken in this sense, every "naturalism" can, in fact, 
only signify degradation, for what is called natural for man as man is 
noi at all the same as what the term "cultural" signifies in ihe case of 



Eros and Sexual Love 



13 



animals; instead, conformity is natural when it is conformity to one's 
own type, to the place that belongs to man as such in the overall 
hierarchy of beings* Thus, to define love and sex in man requires a 
group of complex factors, which in certain cases may even include 
what may seem to be perversion when compared with an animal 
criterion. To be natural in the sense of Campion's words means only 
distortion for man. In man, sex has its own specific physiognomy. It 
is already free to a very large extent— the more the individual is 
differentiated, the freer it is — from the bonds and seasonal periods of 
sexual excitement that are maintained in animal sexuality (and more 
so in the case of females than males). Man can desire and make love at 
any time, and that is a natural extent of his love. It is in no way an 
artificial fact of "corruption' 7 derived from his "separation from 
nature." 

Let us go a step further and say that the notion of sexual love as one 
of the physical needs of man is also the outcome of a 
misunderstanding. Basically, physical sexual desire never exists in 
I n an; the desire of man is substantially always psychic, and his 
physical desire is only a translation and transposition of a psychic 
desire. Only in the most primitive individuals does the circuit close 
so fast that only the terminal fact of the process is present in their 
consciousness as a sharp, driving carnal lust unmistakably linked to 
physiological conditional qualities which take the foremost place in 
animal sexuality. 

As this stage, it is best also to criticize the myth created by 
contemporary sexology when it speaks of an "instinct for 
reproduction" and defines it as the primary fact of all sensualism. 
The instincts of reproduction and for preservation are denominated 
l lie fundamental forces^ linked to the specieSj which operate in man 
hh much as in beasts. The boundaries of this dull and wretched theory 
me marked out by those posirivist biologists and psychologists who, 
like Morse Hi, 4 go so far as to subordinate one instinct to another and 
believe that the individual feeds himself and struggles to survive only 
in order to reproduce himself, the supreme purpose being "the 
Continuity of universal life." 

The relativity of the "instinct for preservation" can be shown by 
indicating how many impulses exist in man that can neutralize or 
hj'.lii (hat instinct to such an extent that they lead to its destruction or 
rise to behavior that is absolutely separate from it and in no way 
re la led to "ihe final purposes of the species." And in certain cases this 
pin l may be played by the "instinct for reproduction," when it does 
noi make us consider our own health or self preservation. 

This "iiisiiiui lor reproduction" represents a wholly abstract 
I'Kplanalion oj lite sexual impulse, as ii lacks auv psychological basis 






14 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Eros and Sexual Love 



15 



and finds no support in conscious individual experience. Instinct in 
?Sjnan is a conscious fact. But as content of consciousness, the instinct 
for reproduction does not exist in man; the "gcnesic" moment has no 
place in sexual desire as experience nor in developments of desire. 
The knowledge that the union of man and woman, moved by sexual 
desire and sensualism, c an re sult jn the begetting o£_a.new beingjs a 
v posteriori or empirical knowledge. We find this confirmed in the fact 
ttiat^ome primitive peoples attributed births to causes bearing no 
relation to coitus. Therefore, what Kiages wrote is completely right: 
"It is a willful falsification to call the sexual instinct an instinct for 
reproduction. Reproduction is a possible outcome of sexual activity 
but is not in any way included in the actual experience of sexual 



excitement. The animal does not know of it; only man know r s" and 
has it in mind, not when he lives the instinct, but when he 
subordinates the instinct to some end. However, it is useless to recall 
how many cases have occurred wherein the beloved's pregnancy was 
not only not sought but was even resisted. It is unthinkable to 
associate the most exalted models of hitman love in history and art, 
such as Tristan and Isolde, Romeo and Juliet, Paolo and Francesca, 
with a happy ending and a baby, or rather a whole brood as a 
crowning feature! A character of d'Aurevilly says of a pair of lovers 
w T ho have never had any babies: "They love each other too much. 
The fire burns, consumes, and does not produce." When asked if she 
was sad because she had no babies, the woman answered; "I don't 
want any* Children are only useful to unhappy women," 

The truth has been expressed in these humorous words; "When 
Adam awoke next to Eve, he did not cry out, as a contemporary 
makes him say, 'Behold the mother of my children, the priestess of 
my hearth!' " And even when the desire to have offspring plays a 
fundamental part in establishing the relations between a man and a 
woman, considerations based on deliberation and social life are 
involved, and that desire has nothing to do with instinct except in the 
special metaphysical sense which we shall discuss later. When a man 
and woman copulate only to bring children into the world, they 
/certainly do not have this idea in mind at the moment of their union, 
nor is it this idea which arouses and transports them during coitus. 
It may be that the future will be different and that, in deference to 
social or even Catholic ethics and guided by advances in artificial 
insemination, efforts will be made to diminish or even eliminate the 
irrational, disturbing factor consisting of the pure erotic act; but even 
in this case it would not be right to speak of instinct. Indeed, the 
primary fact is the attraction that arises belwteti two beings of 
opposite sex, together with alt I he mystery and metaphysics which 
Mini til traction implies; it is the desire ol our I'm the other, the 



y 



invincible impulse toward union and possession in which their acts 
obscure a still deeper impulse. In this, "reproduction" is wholly 
excluded as a conscious motive. 

Some comments made by Solovieff are also relevant in this 
context. He showed the error in thinking that the reason for sexual 
love is the multiplication of the species. Many organisms in both the 
vegetable and the animal realms reproduce asexually; the sexual fact 
occurs in the reproduction not of the organisms in general but of the 
higher organisms. Therefore "the meaning of sexual differentiation 
(and of sexual love) is to be sought not at all in the idea of the survival 
of the species and its mu It i plica tion, but only in the idea of the higher 
organism." Furthermore, "The higher we climb up the ladder of 
organisms, the more the power of multiplication decreases, whereas 
the force of mutual attraction increases. . . . Although sexual love 
reaches its greatest importance and strength in man, he reproduces at 
a lower rate than the animal species," It seems, therefore, that sexual 
love and multiplication of the species are in an inverted ratio to each 
other: The stronger the one, the weaker the other. When we consider 
the two extremes of animal life, if multiplication without sexual love 
is at the lower end, then at the upper end, the summit, there will be 
sexual love that can exist with an almost complete lack of 
reproduction, but with the fullest expression of passion. 7 It has only 
recently been affirmed that "sexual passion almost always involves a 
deviation of instinct . , . in other words, reproduction of the species 
is almost always avoided in the presence of sexual passion. " s This 
indicates that we are dealing here with two different facts, the first of 
which cannot be presented as the means or tool of the other. 9 In its 
higher forms, eros has an independent and not deducible character , 
which is not impaired by anything that may be materially required 
lor its arousal in the sphere of physical love. 

I fir Myth of the Genius of the Species 

It is strange that one of the few attempts to delineate the metaphysics 
ill" sexual love undertaken in modern times was based on the error 
1 1 1 a I we have just exposed. To maintain the concept that the essential 
purpose of love is procreation, "the formation of the next 
Hem* rat ion," Schopenhauer had to introduce a mythical "genius of 
the species," which apparently arouses the attraction between the 
Hi'xcs and is I he determining factor in sexual choice. It is unknow p n to 
the persons involved, whom indeed it deceives and uses as mere 
touts. "The birth of a given baby," said Schopenhauer, "is the true 
objective ol all the romance ol love, even l hough the protagonists are 
liot ;i\v:iicol ih;il objective; the way in which this objective is reached 
In purely sivnndai v" ,n To bo more correct, the objective would be 



It 



16 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



then the procreation of a new being as close as possible to the pure, 
perfect type of the species, able lo survive. Thus the "species" should 
induce every man to choose the woman best fitted for such biological 
purposes and make her seem ideal, clothing her in such an aura of 
beauty and seduction that the possession of her and the pleasure she 
can give seem the essence of all happiness and the real meaning of 
life. "The best for the species lies where the individual believes he 
will find the greatest pleasure." And so feminine beauty and pleasure 
are made out to be illusions, mere baits with which the "genius of the 
species" cheats and makes a fool of the individual. Schopenhauer 
adds, "This is the reason why every lover feels disappointed after he 
has finally attained his purpose, sexual satisfaction, for the illusion 
with which the species has deceived and aroused him lias vanished by 
then." 11 Essentially, these are mere speculations on the borders of 
Darwinism, and their one-sided and abstract nature is obvious. 
First, this mechanism of biological end purpose should belong to the 
unconscious (to which it was assigned most decidedly by E. von 
Hartmann when he took up once more the theories of Schopenhauer 
and developed them coherently). It would have to be a fully 
unconscious instinct that steers an individual toward the particular 
man or woman who shows the most suitable qualities for re- 
production since there is nothing of this kind present in the cons- 
ciousness of the one who loves and desires .The elementary attraction 
of the sexes and the fluid-intoxication that arises between them is 
innocent of such an instinct or its hidden knowledge. As we shall see 
later, even when looked at from the outside and stripped of 
subjective evidence, the problem of sexual choice is much more 
complex than the theory of natural selection implfes. If we shift our 
attention to a mundane activity, nourishment, and compare it to 
sexual choice, we find that no man but the most primitive will choose 
or prefer only those foods best suited for the survival of his organism. 
This is the case not because he is "corrupt" but because he is man. 

Furthermore, many instances can be cited wherein a strong or 
even "fatal" attraction arises between beings who in no way represent 
an optimum choice for the purposes of procreation; therefore, even if 
it is referred to the realm of the unconscious, Schopenhauer's 
impulse is at best relative or indeed nonexistent. Moreover, we 
should expect to find a reduced sexuality among the less noble 
examples of the human species; yet it is in fact the most primitive 
people who are the most prolific. Indeed we might say that the 
"genius of the species" is in need of an education since through its 
agency the average world population falls so far below man's 
potential or true norm. The mental and physical characteristics of an 
iiuliviiln:il depend on I he specific combination oJ his parents 1 



Eros and Sexual Love 



17 



chromosomes, which bear complex and remote heredities that may 
not appear at all in the phenotype of visible qualities of the parents. 
Generally, therefore, according to Schopenhauer, it should follow 
that visible qualities such as beauty , shapeliness, strength, and 
health should not be the governing factors in sexual choice, if solely 
oriented toward procreation, but the "genius of the species" should 
arouse a man's desire for the particular woman who has the most 
fitting chromosomes. Such an absurd conjecture is not very 
profitable since it would be necessary, whenever insemination takes 
place, to see which female and which male chromosomes will prevail, 
joining together to give form to the new being. Even biological 
science has not mastered this knowledge. 

That question aside, in cases of strong passion and sensual 
pleasure among the most evolved individuals (to whom we should 
look for the true norm in its highest sense), we seldom find evidence 
of the "biological end purpose," even retrospectively. Often, and not 
by pure chance, such unions are childless. Man can indeed fall if he 
allows himself to be unnaturally overwhelmed by the daemon at bios, 
and it is at this level that procreation takes place. In man there is a 
nonbiological element that activates the sexual process even at the 
moment when sex invests and moves the physical element, bursting 
out in insemination. The procreative instinct, especially in the 
selective function imagined by Schopenhauer and the followers of 
I )arwin, is a myth. Between love and procreation there is no direct, 
living connection. 

Last, though banal, it is valid to refute "biological flnaUsnT by 
pointing out that physical love has many aspects that this theory does 
not include. They are so integral a part of human erotic experience 
I hat when lacking, the purely physical union may lose a great part of 
its interest and, in certain cases, be thwarted and rendered primitive. 
Kissing, for instance, is not required for procreation, and if kissing 
on the mouth is not universal, equivalent customs such as rubbing 
noses or touching with the forehead have an erotic purpose. As for 
the mingling of breath or inhaling the breath of a woman while 
kissing her, such acts have as their real purpose a "fluidic" contact 
that enhances the elementary state governed in lovers by the polarity 
he sexes. In fact a similar consideration holds true in the 
passionate desire of lovers to extend and increase during coitus the 
mii face contact of their bodies or to cleave to each other fully ("just 
like iwo parts of a living animal which seek to be joined together 
iitfain," to make use of Colette's image). A biological end purpose 
would he content with a simple and strictly localized act, whereas 
these and other aspects of the same profane, physical love include a 
upei i:il symbolic content, :is we skill now see. 



o 



18 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Eras and the Tendency toward Pleasure 

In the elementary impulse that drives man toward woman, we must 
recognize a priority and an individual reality; but this must not give 
rise to ambiguities. 

Let us take the theory that sets the tendency toward pleasure at the 
very base of sexual instinct. It is certainly evident that in most cases, 
when a man feels attracted by a woman and desires her, he seeks to 
imagine the "pleasure" she may give him and to foresee the 
expression on her face and her behavior in general during the crisis of 
coitus, rather than to determine whether she can ensure the birth of 
offspring best fitted to the end purposes of the species. In natural 
erotic development, every experience of deep passion and strong 
inclination doubtless follows the path of that which is called 
"pleasure," but it docs not have pleasure as a principal and preset 
objective; if it does, we may well speak of lust and debauchery, which 
are trends corresponding to dissociations, degradations, and 
"rationalizations" of physical love. The idea of "pleasure" as a ruling 
motive does not exist in the "normal state of eras," but the impulse 
aroused by sexual polarity causes a state of intoxication reaching its 
apogee in the "pleasure" of physical union and orgasm. Any man 
who is truly in love, in possessing a woman, entertains the idea of 
^ "pleasure" as little as that of children. The teachings of Freud, 
therefore, were mistaken in his earliest phase when he established the 
pleasure principle, the Lffilprinzip> as the basis not only of eros but of 
the whole human psychic life. In this the theories of Freud were just 
the products of his time. In periods of decadence such as the present 
one, sensuality develops in the dissociated form of simple pleasure. 
As a result, sex becomes a kind of drug, and the addiction to it is no 
less profane than actual drug addiction. 12 Freudianism soon 
abandoned its initial position, however, and in fact Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle was the title of a successive work of Freud's. 13 

But this train of thought must not lead us to consider every ars 
amandi to be corrupt and decadent. The art of love once existed as a 
discipline that was not reduced to an assemblage of devices and 
techniques depending on mere lust. This art was known in ancient 
times and is still practiced among Eastern peoples* Both then and 
now, women skilled in this art have been esteemed and respected no 
less than virtuosi of any other art. In classical times the courtesans 
were publicly held in high regard by men such as Pericles, Pheidias, 
and Alcibiadcs; Solon had a temple built in honor of the goddess of 
"prostitution," and such temples existed in Rome for the worship of 
certain forms of the goddess Venus. In the days of Polybius, statues 
of courtesans stood in temples and public buildings near I hose of 



Eros and Sexual Love 



19 



soldiers and statesmen. Such women in Japan have also been 
honored with monuments. And, as with every art in the traditional 
world, there is associated with this art a secret knowledge. Pries- 
tess prostitutes of the ars amandi were linked to certain initiatic 
cults. 

The higher capabilities of the experience of eros will not manifest 
when this experience takes place in its coarsest and blindest forms. 
We shall see whether the most profound dimension of eros holds its 
ground or can predominate in conscious developments of sensation 
or whether those developments degenerate into a licentious, extrinsic 
search for "pleasure." Two possible and distinct sides of the ars 
amandi must be defined. We are oflen deceived in the second of the 
two eases; there is no technique of love that, in the realm of 
"pleasure," can lead to an intense or differentiated quality without 
assuming an innermost psychic nature. If this is present, the touch of 
a hand can sometimes provoke a greater intoxication than any skillful 
activation of erogenous zones. 

Later, the reader will see why the word "pleasure" has been put 
between quotations marks in discussing what generally takes place at 
the peak of physical love. In the meantime it will be useful to debunk 
certain sexological views that have been lormulated regarding this 
question, since our intention is to free this field of every materialistic 
explanation of eros. 

Sensual Pleasure 

Piobb wrote: "The sexual spasm is one of those phenomena that 
elude physiology proper. The latter has to be content with stating the 
fact and showing only its nervous mechanism." 14 That is true, and 
every effort to give a "scientific" or profane explanation of this 
pleasure is condemned to failure. In this field, as in so many others, 
ambiguities have multiplied owing to the failure to distinguish the 
content of the experience itself from the conditions that are needed for 
ii to occur, even more so when such conditions are studied by 
physiology rather than by psychology. 

The prize for vulgarity was won by eighteenth century positivism 
when it gave weight to the following theory: "The genetic need can 
be considered as a need to evacuate; the choice is governed by stimuli 
which make the evacuation more pleasurable." 15 In this view, 
pleasure would apparently be caused by evacuation, by the process of 
discharging the sexual products. We should ask ourselves why 
analogous processes, beginning with the emptying of the bladder 
during urinal ion, do not bring as much pleasure. Next, it is obvious 
ili.il i liis tin niveau berighl, ifal all, in I he ease of man only, since the 



20 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Eros and Sexual Love 



21 



sexual climax in woman is not linked to an ejaculation. In her the 
appearance of vaginal secretions runs parallel to her general state of 
erotic excitement and may even be lacking; if vaginal fluids are 
secreted by a woman, they are linked to the reduction of swelling, to 
the lessening of congestion of the blood in the sexual organs, which in 
some cases may coincide with the moment when she is bathed with 
semen but in other cases is independent thereof and, in any event, is 
only the effect of a psychic and nervous fact. 

Sexologists have mistakenly paid little attention to the fact that 
orgasm can be felt in a dream without ejaculation by both men and 
women. Some say that this pleasure can have a more ecstatic and all- 
pervasive nature than that of the actual sexual act, and we shall see 
the reason for this. 16 It often happens in both men and women that 
pleasure is interrupted at a given point of intensity and the person 
awakens at that moment. Correctly interpreted, it is the normal 
association of pleasure with the physiological that automatically 
brings the dreaming person back to the physically conditioned plane 
by interrupting the process. In principle, however, the pleasure in 
the dream can be adopted as one of the arguments for. demonstrating 

^ the possibility of an erotic process separated from. habitual, 

physiologically conditioned circumstances. Men can even experience 
pleasure in sleep when generative capacity has become exhausted 
through old age or when the ability to ejaculate has been destroyed by 
traumatic conditions in the nervous ducts. 

For that matter, the impulse to coitus cannot be understood by a 
materialistic explanation in the animal world either and is, in a 
certain way, endogenous. Some experiments, conducted first by 
Tarchanoff, showed that in certain cases the seminal vessels of an 
animal were empty before copulation and filled up gradually during 
copulation, thus inverting the relationship between cause and effect; 
far from being governed by the state of fullness and swelling of the 
organs, the sexual impulse itself brought about that state. 17 If 
analogous research were to be carried out on man, this fact would be 
confirmed. Eunuchs whose seminal glands have been removed 
usually suffer from sexual anesthesia; yet there have been cases 
where their sexual desire persists and even becomes sharpened. In 
some instances, desire is so intense that, far from needing depletion, 
it drives the genital organs to the extremes of their capability, doing 
violence to nature so that man emits blood rather than semen. Also, a 
very high intensity of desire can inhibit rather than provoke 
ejaculation (we shall return to this point)- 18 Finally, in passion-love, 
when all the resources of the physical have been exhausted in coitus, 
the feeling often remains thai it has noi been enough, dial nunc is 
wauled, vol die physiological conditions and I ho capabilities ol die 



flesh in general do not permit it. This becomes a torment. 

Thus, Havelock Ellis, after various attempts to explain sensual 
pleasure, again concluded that the impulse which leads to pleasure is, 
in a certain way, independent of the seminal glands and. their 
condition, I9 From a physio-anatomical point of view, the existence of 
sexual centers in the brain (already presumed by Gall) as well as in the 
spine and in the sympathetic nervous system is now generally 
accepted; this is the counterpart of the essential role played by the 
imagination not only in love generally but in sexuality itself, for the 
imagination accompanies and sometimes even starts and activates the 
whole process of copulation, whereas at other times it can stop it 
irreversibly. 

Other modern research has attempted to explain sexual excitement 
as an effect of hormone intoxication; indeed some have cited this 
cause as the very basis of falling in love. In order not to be caught in a 
vicious circle, we must completely clarify the cause of hormonal 
intoxication since it could be a psychically conditioned fact; but e_v_en 
whexe_.it is. not, we must not confuse something that .favors an ;;., 
experience (like "hormonic saturation" or "hormonic threshold") 
with something that determines an experience and constitutes its real 
content. In regard to providing favorable conditions, the part 
attributed to hormones may even be played by certain substances, 
such as alcohol. But it is known that one's reaction to these depends 
on a "personal equation," and the causal reasoning in this respect is 
as naive as that of the person who says that the lifting of the barriers of 
a dam is the cause that produces the water that bursts through the 
opening. 

We must credit the psychoanalytic theory of libido for its 
recognition of the autonomous psychic and elementary nature of the 
impulse for sexual union. However, psychoanalysis also believes that 
libido is not necessarily connected with physiological processes; the 
possibility of displacing "charges" of libido is, for example, attested in 
many typical cases when its realization causes morbid symptoms to 
disappear. Nor does this connection exist in pregenital stages of 
libido and its forms of satisfaction. The material gathered in this 
research constitutes a further argument against every physiological 
theory regarding the sexual impulse. In its assessment of pleasure, 
l lie psychoanalytic theory is equivalent to that of Fere, which we 
have already criticized. 20 Both theories are mistaken in conceiving 
pleasure as a solely negative phenomenon, like relief of a painful or 
unpleasant stale. The same misconception is applied to sexual 
pleasure deemed as a mere relief from the physiological discomfort 
caused by the swelling of the organs. Psychoanalysis only sees 
mechanical antf intcrclian^cablc processes wherein pleasure is 



n 



22 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Eros and Sexual Love 



23 






apparently derived from the termination of any state of tension, from 
the discharge of a concurrent "charge" (Besetsungsenergie) of the 
libido. Indeed the term in German that signifies sexual satisfaction or 
pleasure — Befriedigung— connotes a sense of perturbation because it 
also means the pacification, almost the cessation, of a disagreeable 
state of tension, agitation, or excitement. We should ponder whether 
this theory is not merely symptomatic of our times, for to perceive 
sexuality and "pleasure'' in these simple terms proceeds from an eros 
that has become primitive and physical. 21 

We can therefore conclude that sexual desire is a complex fact of 
which the physiological is only a part; sexual excitement, which is 
substantially psychic, forms the primary element that under various 
conditions causes physical excitement and sets in motion all the 
physiological phenomena that accompany the excitement but are 
often absent prior to it. Only the metaphysics of sex, not psychology 
or physiology, can shed light on this subject. We can already foresee 
that physical union, taken on its own, is only the mechanism through 
which is conveyed a process of a higher order, transcending that 
union and showing it to be part of a whole. W T hen this transcendental 
aspect is recognized, "pleasure" as a coarse and carnal satisfaction 
depending strictly on the physiological conditioning or Scho- 
penhauer's "bait for procreation" is a problematical solution. 

The Magnetic Theory of Love 

Further on we shall attempt to investigate the ultimate meaning of 
sex; for the moment we shall attend to an intermediate domain in 
order to shed light on the elementary substratum of every eros, and 
we shall now employ the term "metaphysics" in its other sense, 
meaning knowledge of the supraphysical, invisible side of the human 
being. 

As we have seen, eros cannot be explained by biological finalism, 
by the genetic impulse, or by the detached idea of pleasure as the end 
purpose. Apart from all these theories, eros must be considered as a 
state governed directly by the polarity of the sexes in the same way 
that the presence of positive and negative poles governs the 
phenomenon of magnetism and everything connected to a magnetic 
field. Any empirical and material references we may cite to explain 
this elementary "magnetic" phenomenon contributes only to the 
presupposition of the phenomenon and has in turn to be explained by 



it. 



22 



This point of view is no mere fantasy on the author's part; it 
corresponds to the knowledge of ancient traditions. For example, in 
the traditional teachings of the Far East, when a man and woman 
meet., even wilhoul any physical contact, a special energy or 



immaterial "fluid" called tsing is aroused in the deepest layers of their 
beings. This energy springs from the polarity of they in and the yang, 
which we provisionally define as the pure principles of female and 
male sexuality. This energy, tsing, is a specification of the radical, 
vital force tsri and grows in proportion to the degree ofyang and yin 
present in man and woman. This special magnetically induced force 
has as its psychological counterpart the state of diffused intoxication, 
vibration, and desire proper to human eros. The occurrence of this 
state causes the first displacement of the ordinary level of waking 
consciousness, which can be followed by other stages. The mere 
presence of the woman in front of the man arouses the elementary 
degree of tsing and its corresponding state. In societies where a sense 
i of this elementary force of sex has been retained, strict conventions 
'are formulated from this deep existential basis rather than a 
j moralistic one. This applies to the rule "that no woman can visit a 
iman except in the presence of another man, particularly if the first 
man is married. The rule applies to all women, for sex has no age, and 
to break the rule even in the most innocent of ways is to have sinned." 
If a man and woman are alone before each other, even if no contact 
takes place, it is just the same as if it had. This is because the first 
level of tsing , the elementary magnetism, has been awakened. The 
second level, already more intense, happens with bodily contact 
(ranging from holding hands and touching each other to kissing). 
The third degree is reached when the man penetrates the woman and 
is embraced by her. This is the limit of the magnetic development for 
most modern lovers. However, it is not the true limit, for yet other 
stages are reached in the practice of sex in sacred and evocatory forms 
or in sexual magic in a specific sense. "Subtle" changes, particularly 
in the breathing and the blood, accompany and are proper to these 
various degrees. The psychic correlative is essentially like a state of 
vibration and heightening, of exaltation in the true sense of the word. 
Therefore, we may speak of a "natural magic of love" as a fully 
real, hyperphysical fact that occurs in the life of the most 
commonplace, materialistic, and primitive of humans. Even if the 
views we have just expressed are incompatible with modern 
psychology, they are confirmed by popular knowledge. Even 
without having a clear idea of the content of the word, it is generally 
recognized that an attraction between a man and a woman is born 
only when something "like a fluid" — a certain chemistry — is 
established between them. We ought to consider cases of a brutal and 
immediate lust for a woman as instances of a short circuit and "drop 
in potential" of this immaterial fluid. When this fluidic relationship 
is lacking., any exchange of feeling from the coarsest to the most 
spiritual is impossible, h is si ill customary to speak of the 



24 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



" fas ci nation* * of a woman, a term that brings us back to the magical 
definition of love; fascinum was, in fact, the technical term used in 
earlier times for a kind of enchantment or witchcraft. 

This concept was part of the theory of love held in the West even 
into the Renaissance, and it was known in other civilizations as well, 
notably in Islam, For instance, we find it set forth in Lucretius and 
Avicenna and later in Marsilio Ficino and Delia Porta. Ficino said 
that the basis of love- fever consists of a perturbatio (disturbance) and 
of a kind of infection of the "blood" provoked under the same 
conditions as the so-called evil eye, for it was actuated by means of 
the eye and the glance. If this is understood as happening on a subtle 
rather than on a material plane, then it is strictly correct. The fluidic 
state, the tsing force of Chinese teaching, is aroused in the beginning 
by a look and then goes on to spread thoughout the blood. From that 
moment on, the lover bears his beloved in a certain way in his bloody 
no matter what distance may separate them. 23 Theories aside, this 
knowledge is present in the universal language of lovers: "I've got 
you in my blood," "I feel you in my blood," "I've got you under my 
skin." These widespread and stereotyped expressions describe a fact 
that is much more essential and real than those focused on by 
contemporary sexology. 24 But we should bear in mind that when 
ancient traditions spoke of blood, they almost always referred to a 
transphysiological doctrine. The traditional concept is well enough 
expressed in the following terms, which may perhaps seem rather 
sybilline to the ordinary reader: ' 'Blood is the great sympathetic 
agent of life; it is the motor of the imagination; it is the animated 
foundation of the magnetic or astral light polarized in living beings; it 
is the first incarnation of the universal fluid; it is vital light 
materialized »" 25 

In our own times a "magnetic" theory of love was roughly sketched 
by Mauclair, ignoring the foregoing antecedents. He saw that this 
theory helped to overcome the dichotomy between body and spirit, 
flesh and soul, a contrast that is really nonexistent in erotic 
experience. Everything takes place on an intermediate plane on 
which the two elements are fused and aroused by each other (whether 
the senses arouse the soul or ihe soul arouses the senses is a matter 
that depends on the particular constitution of the individuals, but in 
both cases the end state contains within itself both elements fused 
together and transcends them at the same time). In this intermediate 
condition we can speak legitimately of a "magnetic" state observed 
directly. Mauclair s s magnetic hypothesis explains best the unusual 
state of hyperesthesia of a couple transported with love and 
confirms "our daily experience that the state of love is neither 
spiritual nor carnal and escapes all categories of current moral 



Eros and Sexual Love 



25 



philosophy." He adds: "The magnetic reasons are the only true ones 
and remain secret from and sometimes ignored by those who are 
themselves in love; for they cannot give precise motives for their love 
and, if they are questioned, bring forth a set of allegations . . . which 
are nothing other than reasons close to the essential reason, which 
cannot be articulated. A man does not love a woman because she is 
beautiful, pleasing, intelligent, or charming, nor because she is likely 
to produce an exceptionally strong sensual feeling. All these 
explanations are only given to satisfy ordinary logic. ... He loves 
because he loves, quite apart from ail logic, and it is precisely this 
enigma that reveals the magnetism of love." 26 Lolli had already 
distinguished three kinds of love — "platonic" love, sensual and 
physical love, and magnetic love — when he said that magnetic love is 
a mixture of the other two and is tremendously strong, spreading 
throughout every single part of man but having its main seat in the 
breath. 2 But in reality, it is not a particular kind of love but is the 
ultimate basis of all love. 

These ideas can be readily integrated with the traditional teachings 
mentioned just now. They give prominence to a fact that is 
elementary or primary (though it will no longer continue to be so, 
only because of a properly metaphysical consideration of the matter), 
namely the "magnetic" structure of eros. And just as There is no 
attraction between man and woman when a special "fluid" has not 
been established between them either actually or potentially, so in 
the same way sexual love dies away when the magnetism wanes. In 
such a case all efforts to keep alive an amorous relationship will be 
doomed to failure, just like trying to keep a machine running when 
energy is lacking or (to use an image that is better fitted to magnetic 
symbolism) like trying to keep a metal joined to an electromagnet 
when there is no longer any current to create a magnetic field. 
External conditions may even remain unchanged: youth, handsome 
bodies, liking, intellectual affinity, and so on; but when the state of 
magnetism comes to an end, eros and desire also fade away 
inevitably. And if everything does not end, if every interest of the one 
in the other does not die away, yet there will be a change from love in 
iis full and proper meaning to a relationship based on affection, 
custom, social factors, and so forth. This represents not a 
sublimation but a substitute, a last resource and basically another 
t hing as compared with that which is conditioned by the elementary 
polarity of the sexes. 

1 1 is important to observe that although the magnetic or magic fact 
or Case ina I ion whatever we wish to call it — takes place 
spontaneously between lovers, (hey also find ii useful to nourish and 
develop this niaj»ic iiitenlionallv. SleiulhaTs ctmcepl of 



u. 



26 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Eros and Sexual Love 



27 



crystallization in love is very well known: 28 Just as the naked boughs 
of a tree are sometimes clad with crystals In the salty atmosphere of 
Salzburg, so the desire of a lover, when concentrated on the image of 
his beloved, crystallizes, as it were, an aura composed of every kind 
of psychic content. That which is called magnetic fascination from an 
objective viewpoint can be rendered in psychological terms with the 
word "crystallization," "monoideism," or "forced image" 
(Zwangsvorstellung). This last is a very essential element in every 
amorous relationship; the thoughts of the one are held more or less 
obsessively by the other in a form of partial schizophrenia (expressed 
in such phrases as "to be madly in love" and 'Tin crazy about you"). 
This phenomenon of mental concentration, as Pin said quite rightly, 
"is an almost automatic fact, completely independent of the 
personality and will. Anyone who, whether lacking in will power or 
energetic, lazy or busy, knowledgeable or ignorant, poor or rich, falls 
in love, feels that at a certain moment his thoughts are literally 
chained to a given person without any possibility of escape. 
Concentration, therefore, is a phenomenon that is in a certain way 
hermetic, 29 massive, uniform, not subject to arguments reason, or 
modification, extremely tenacious." 30 For lovers, this concentration 
is a kind of barometer of love, and they take constant readings 
through such questions as "Do you think about me?" and "Will you 
always think of me?" They consciously nourish and strengthen this 
concentration as it gives the measure of their love, making use of all 
sorts of expedients to make it as continuous as possible. The phrase 
"You are always in my thoughts" is the correlative of "You are in my 
blood." Thus, unconsciously, lovers activate an authentic magical 
technique, which is grafted onto the primary magical magnetic fact 
and causes a further development of Stendhal's crystallization as an 
outcome. In his Liber de arte amandi, Andrea Cappellano defined love 
as a kind of agony due to extreme meditation about a person of the 
opposite sex. 

Eliphas Levi, a writer who, unlike those already mentioned, 
professes wiih some foundation lo be a believer in magic sciences and 
in the Kabbala, says that the meeting of the magneLic atmospheres of 
a man and woman leads to a complete intoxication of "astral light," 
the signs of which are love and passion. The special elation caused by 
the congestion of "astral light" should constitute the basis of amorous 
fascination, 31 These ideas, drawn from traditions that we mentioned 
earlier^ may illuminate another aspect of the phenomenon 
considered here. However, the terminology used by Levi will remain 
obscure for the ordinary reader unless we add some clarification. 

The congestion of astral light is the objective correlative of wliai wo 
called "exaltation." "Astral light" is synonymous with tuxnatUMi'ln 



* 



term used in particular by Paracelsus), with the akasha of Hindu 
tradition, the or of Kabbalism, and the ch'i of Chinese philosophy. 
Many other expressions of esoteric teachings have the same meaning 
and refer to the hyperphysical foundation of life and of nature itself, 
to a "vital ether" understood as the "life of life." In the Orphic 
hymns, the ether is the "soul of the world," from which every vital 
force springs. Regarding the term lux naturae , it can be noted that the 
association between light and life recurs in the traditional teachings 
of widely varying cultures and is echoed in the first words of the 
Gospel of John. The point of interest here is that this light can, to a 
certain degree, become an object of experience, but only in a state of 
consciousness different from the normal waking state, in one 
corresponding more to the dream state in ordinary man. And just as 
in the dream, the imagination acts freely, so any displacement of 
consciousness provoked by a congestion or intoxication of "astral 
light" involves a form of imagination that in its way is magical. 

However obsolete this concept may seem in the context of modern 
science, the fundamental facts mentioned above relate to this astral 
realm. As we shall see, operative sexual magic is also based on this, 
among other things. It is this magnetized imagination or 
"exaltation," rather than the intellect, which acts in lovers. And just 
as the British expression for being in love, "to fancy one another," is 
very significant, so Chamfort touches on something essential when 
he defines love as "the contact between two skins and the exchange of 
two fantasies." Again we find that the common language of lovers, 
usually taken as sentimental, romantic, or flaccid, meaningfully 
relates to this point. A. Husson certainly did not realize how close to 
the truth he came when he said that lovers live between dreams and 
death, "Dream of love/' "dream of you," and "like a dream" are 
familiar phrases. The "dreaming" aspects among lovers is typical. 
The stereotyped repetition of such expressions in pulp romances 
does not count. The positive and objective content is the obscure 
feeling, the foreboding, of a shift in the plane of consciousness linked 
in varying degrees to cros. Such expressions, therefore, are so many 
"intervening indices," as are the continued use, rationalism 
notwithstanding, of words such as "fascination," "fluid," "charms," 
and "enchantment" when talking of the relations between the sexes. 
I low odd all these facts would seem if love had a mere biological end 
purpose! 

The Degrees of Sexual Development 

In speaking of the teachings of the Far East, we said that the state of 
eros springs potentially from the relationship between the yang and 
win qualities oil wo luim;in brings. Kliphas Levi was referring lo the 



28 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Eros and Sexual Love 



29 



same phenomenon when he identified the cause of that state as the 
coming into contact of the magnetic atmospheres of two individuals 
of the opposite sex. It is best to go into this point more deeply, and 
that will lead us to the problem of sexual choice as well 

The current concepts of man and woman are little better than 
approximations. Indeed, the process of sexual development consists 
of multiple degrees, for we are not all men or women to the same 
degree. From a biological point of view it is known that during the 
earliest embryonic phases, hermaphroditism or bisexuality is 
encountered, Orchansky showed earlier that the primitive genital 
gland, extracted from the body of Wolff, is hermaphroditic. In the 
formation of a new being, the action of the force that causes the 
sexual differentiation of organic matter becomes increasingly 
precise. By means of this force , the capabilities relating to one sex are 
developed, whereas those of the opposite sex are eliminated or stay in 
the embryonic or latent slate, or are present only in varying 
quantities, depending on the predominant capabilities that define 
the actual male and female type. There is thus an analogy with what 
happens in ontogenesis. Just as the process of individuation of a 
human being leaves behind it, in its rudimentary state, the 
capabilities corresponding to various animal species, so also, in man 
and woman, the process of sexual development leaves behind it, in 
the rudimentary state, the capabilities of the opposite sex which were 
present in the original state. (One aspect of this is the existence of 
hormone complexes of the two sexes and, herewith, a latent 
bisexuality in every individual.) 

When sexual development takes place, sexual characteristics of 
various types are usually classified separately > as follows: primary 
characteristics linked to the genital glands and reproductive organs; 
secondary characteristics regarding typical male and female traits of 
the body along with the corresponding anatomical and humoral 
differences; tertiary characteristics, which mainly concern the 
psychological sphere of behavior, of mental, moral, and emotional 
dispositions. All of this lies within the field of effects , whereas the 
cause is sex as a molding and differentiating force. 

In biology, the vitalism of Driesch and other authors has by now 
f won acceptance, and so it is no longer heretical to look into forces of 
! that kind. The Aristotelian concept of entelechy has been revived, 
I and indeed had to be revived, as a heuristic biological principle. And 
S entelechy is precisely the force that molds from within, being 
; biological and physical in its manifestations alone; it is t he "life of 
] life." In ancient times it was deemed to be the soul or "form" of the 
| body; considered in this way, it has a hyperphysieul, immaterial 
e ha racier. 






It seems -clear, however, that at the base of the process of sexual 
development there is a differentiated entelechy which constitutes the 
true root of sex. The various primary, secondary, or tertiary sexual 
characteristics of man or woman come later and are its outward 
expressions. 

Weininger, in seeming to go deeper into the problem of sexual 
differentiation, asked whether it would not be right to revive a theory 
defended earlier by Steenstrup, who had presumed the existence of a 
differentiated plasma in individuals of the two sexes. For this plasma 
Weininger proposed the names "arrenoplasma" and "taliplasma," 
;and he said that it would make sex present in every cell of the 
organism. 32 New and deeper biological research will be able to 
confirm or refute this hypothesis. However, by means of it, an 
undeniably accurate intuition had been applied at the wrong level. 
Since the basis of sex is supraphysical, it lies in what we and the 
ancients have called the soul of the body, that "subtle body.' 1 ,- 
intermediate between the material and the immaterial, which 
appears under various names in the traditional teachings (for 
instance, the sukshma-sharira of the Hindus and the sidereal body of 
Paracelsus). Moreover, we must think of something comparable to a 
"fluid" that surrounds, saturates, and qualifies the bodies of man and 
woman — not only in their physical aspects, by giving each organ, 
each function, each tissue, and each humor a sexual imprint, but also 
in their inner nature, as a direct outward expression of a different 
entelechy. 

If there truly were a difference between the plasma of man and 
woman, then it would be due to such an entelechy. Thus, when 
Weininger said that sex is present in every part of the body, he was 
right so long as he was not referring only to the biological plane. In 
effect he had already gone beyond that plane when, to prove his 
thesis, he declared that every part of the body of one sex produces 
erotic excitement in the body of the other sex; for to explain this, it is 
necessary to bring in a supraphysical factor. 

By means of all this we have already come close to the concept of 
that "magnetic differentiated atmosphere proper to individuals of 
different sexes" of which we spoke before. In Far Eastern terms this 
is a question of the yang and yin principles, which penetrate both the 
inner being and the material body of man and woman under the form 
of a fluid and an elementary molding energy. 

One of the names given to this subtle body is "aromal body." The 
relationship with smell is not without sexological importance. The 
special pari played by sweat in certain popular enchantments is well 
known. t4 Smell plays an important part in the magnetism of physical 
low and in the "fluid k* intoxication" of lovers. It was believed in 



30 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



olden times and is still believed among certain primitive peoples 
today that the fluid of a being penetrates to such an extent that it 
impregnates not only the body but also the clothing (with this are 
associated some cases of fetishism). Hence arise practices that are 
often continued in the customs of both lovers and primitive peoples. 
To breathe in the smell and to always carry a piece of the lover's 
clothing is believed to enforce the relationship and mutual 
faithfulness (a custom followed in. the Philippines), These practices 
would seem to be merely superstitious if one overlooked the 
"psychic" element. The extreme case is that of an erotic intoxication 
that is liable to be aroused not only by a glance but even by a smell 
("He looked at her and inhaled her, she looked at him and inhaled 
him" — W. Somerset Maugham). 34 Furthermore, it should be noted 
that the Latin term fascinum has, in origin and literal meaning, an 
essential connection with the sense of smell. Anyone whose 
sensitivity is sufficiently refined will recognize that in amorous 
relations there is a kind of mutual psychic vampirism that is partly 
rooted in the sense of smell. The smell of man or woman in purely 
material terms concerns us here only in a secondary way; the 
possibility of a corresponding psychic effect in the case of human 
beings can only be explained in terms of an equally psychic, subtle 
counterpart. This fact clearly demonstrates characteristics that are 
instinctive and rather coarse and that are often more highly 
accentuated in various animal species; for here, as elsewhere, that 
which in man belongs in principle to a higher plane is made visible 
and specific in animal life in terms of a kind of daemonism of the bios. 
It is also possible to see the basis of the ancient Mexican belief that 
reproduction is the outcome of the mingling of the breath of man and 
woman. 

Having completed this not un useful digression, lei us return to the 
problem of sexual development. We have said that there are various 
degrees of sexual development. The physical -anatomical fact that in 
every individual of one sex there are also rudiments of the other sex 
corresponds more generally to the possibility of an incomplete sexual 
development and therefore of beings who are exclusively men or 
women but who have characteristics of intermediate grades. That is 
the same as saying that in every person both male and female qualities 
are present in different degrees, even if the vital force or "fluid" ^f 
the person is fundamentally y<mg or yin, Weininger deserves special 
praise for having emphasized this point and also for having 
formulated a corresponding methodological criterion: II is necessary 
To start by defining absolute man and absolute woman, male and 
female in I heir pure state as 1*1 ;i ionic ideas or archetypes, so I hat we 
may disci in ihe degree "I aeiual sexual development in given 



Eros and Sexual Love 



31 



individuals, 35 In the same way, the study of the abstract triangle as a 
pure geometric figure can provide us with knowledge applicable to 
the numerous triangular forms of reality, which are only 
approximations of the perfect triangle, in order to characterize and 
distinguish those forms in real life. Our sole reservation lies in the 
fact that, as opposed to the case of geometry, the absolute man and 
absolute woman are conceived not only from a heuristic point of view 
as being abstract measurements for masculinity and femininity, but 
I also ontologically and metaphysically as being real primordial powers 
that are always and inseparably present and active in men and 
women, even though actual men and women show such powers to a 
greater or lesser degree. 

However, except in extreme cases (or ? it is very important to add, 
in very unusual experiences), the picture we get of every normal man 
and woman is one in which the content of pure male or female quality 
varies, whence springs the first law of sexual attractions. In origin 
this law was first expounded by Plato when he set as the basis of 
attraction the need for a complement; for this he employed the image 
of the symbolon ^ 6 3i word that described an object broken into two 
parts, as used in ancient times by two persons to identify each other; 
The part shown by one person had to match perfectly the part kept 
by the other person. In the same way, said Plato, every human being 
bears within himself a distinctive sign and seeks instinctively and 
unendingly "the corresponding half of himself which bears the same 
distinctive sign," the complementary signs that make the two parts 
mate together. 37 The same idea, more closely specified, was 
developed by Schopenhauer, 38 who said that the right conditions for 
a strong passion arise when two persons neutralize each other in turn, 
just as an acid and a base do when forming a salt. Thus, as there are 
various degrees of sexual development, such a situation arises when a 
given degree of virility finds its counterpart in a corresponding 
degree of femininity in the other being. Lastly, Weininger put 
; forward a real formula for the first basis of sexual attraction. 39 When 
the absolute man and the absolute woman are taken as criteria, there 
i is generally something of man in a woman and of woman in a man. He 
J believed that the greatest attraction is aroused between a man and a 
! woman when the masculine and feminine parts in both are added 
i together and the totals obtained arc the absolute man and the 
absolute woman. For instance, a man who is three-quarters man 
'lyang) and one-quarter w T oman (yin) will be irresistibly attracted and 
develop the strongest magnetism with his female complement, a 
Woman who is one-quarter man and three-quarters woman; this will 
lie so because I he sums of ihe fractions will reestablish the whole 
absolute man and absolule woman.' 10 In fact, il is (he absolute man 



32 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



and absolute woman who form the true basis of the primordial 
polarity of the sexes and therefore provoke the first spark of eros. We 
can affirm that they are the ones who love each other and seek to be 
united with each other through the persons of every man and every 
woman; and so the saying is true that all women love only one man 
and all men love only one woman. 41 The formula put forward by 
Weininger, therefore, establishes one of the essential conditions of 
sexual choice when it calls into play the deepest layers of a person's 
being. 

Physical Sex and Inner Sex 

At this point we have to consider the following principle: Except in 
cases of complete transcendence of the human condition, sex must be 
conceived as a "destiny," a basic fact of human nature. There is no 
existence except as men and women. This point of view is held 
steadfastly against the belief that being a man or a woman is 
something accidental or secondary as compared with being human in 
general; sex is seen as a difference that concerns only the physical and 
biological pan of human nature, to the degree that sex has meaning 
and implications only with respect to the naturalistic side of human 
life. Such a point of view is abstract and inorganic and in reality can 
only be held by a human race disintegrating through regression and 
degeneracy. This view only considers the final, most coarse and 
tangible aspects of sex. But the truth is that, before and besides 
existing in the body, sex exists in the soul and, to a certain extent, in 
the spirit itself. We are man or woman inwardly before being so 
externally; the primordial male or female quality penetrates and 
saturates the whole of our being visibly and invisibly, in the terms 
used here earlier, just as color permeates a liquid. Moreover, if 
intermediate degrees of sexual development exist, as we saw earlier, 
that can only mean that the basic quality mentioned shows an 
intensity that is sometimes higher, sometimes lower, depending on 
the individual. This does not explain the conditional nature of sex. 
Apart from those exceptional cases in which sex is transcended 
because the human condition in general has been transcended, we 
often mistake as "beyond sex" a condition that, in effect, concerns a 
realm detached from life and from every deep formative force. This is 
a realm of superstructures and of intellectualized and social forms 
whose excessive growth characterizes the degenerating and 
bourgeois phases of a civilization. Later on we shall emphasize the 
fact that every human being consists of two parts; one the csscnliaJ 
part and the other the outer, artificial, acquired part thai is formed in 
ihe life of relalionships and creates the persona of the individual. The 
word "persona" is used in the original sense of an aclor's mask (as 



Eros and Sexual Love 



33 



opposed to the "face," which can be said to correspond to the 
essential part). Either of the two parts can be more developed than 
the other, depending not only on the individual but also on the kind 
of civilization. This can degenerate to an almost exclusive, 

l teratological development of the outer and artificial mask of the 

i social, intellectual, practical, and spiritualized individual, which 
maintains few organic relations with the essential being. It is only in 
such cases that sex can be considered secondary and negligible; an 
'anesthetization or a primitivistic coarsening of sexual life is its usual 
^ resulting counterpart. Only then will it seem of little importance 
whether one is man or woman, and such a fact will have less and less 
value in the determination of vocations, self-development, conduct 
of life, model of occupations a value that has always been honored 
by civilizations. This very assumption implies that the difference 
between male and female psychology has been considerably reduced . 
Modern civilization, being expedient, inlellectualist, and 

1 socialized, has given an increasing emphasis to things totally 
unconnected with the essential side of human beings. It is inorganic 
and potentially standardized; its values are partly derived from a 

I regression of types and partly foster and increase that regression. 

! - Thus modern woman is penetrating into every sector of lite and 
making herself the equal of man; for the merits, capabilities, 
behavior, and the most typical activities of modern civilization have 
only very scanty links with the deeper plane where the law of sex is in 
force in ontological terms rather than physical, biological, or even 
psychological terms- The mistake that underlies feminist 
competition and has made it possible is the overvaluation natural to 
modern civilization of logical and practical intelligence, which is 
actually a mere accessory of life and the soul; for these latter two are 
both equally differentiated, whereas the intelligence is formless and 
"neutral" and can be developed to an almost equal extent in man and 
woman. 42 

Here we shall make only a passing reference to the vexed question 
of the inferiority, equality, or superiority of woman as compared 
with man. A question of this kind is lacking in sense because it 
assumes that the two can be measured against each other. If we set 
aside everything artificial, external, and acquired, we find that there 
is a difference of Platonic ideas between man and woman that makes 
impossible any common measurement. Even faculties or gifts that 
appear to be common to both and to be "neutral" have a different 
functional character and imprint, depending on whether they are 
present in a man or a woman. We cannot ask ourselves whether 
"woman" is superior or inferior to "man" any more than we can ask 
ourselves whether water is superior or inferior to fire. Thus the 



34 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



standard of measurement for either of the sexes can be provided not 
by the opposite sex but only by the "idea" of the same sex. In other 
words* the only thing we can do is establish the superiority or 
inferiority of a given woman on the basis of her being more or less 
close to the female type, to the pure and absolute woman, and the 
same thing applies to man as well. The claims of modern woman, 
therefore, spring from mistaken ambitions as well as from an 
inferiority complex, from the mistaken idea that a woman as such is 
inferior to man. It has been said rightly that feminism has really 
fought not for "woman's right" but, without knowing it, for the right 
of woman to make herself equal to man. Even if this could be 
achieved on a level beyond the outer expedient and intellectual level 
mentioned earlier, it would amount to a woman's having the right to 
pervert herself and to degenerate. 43 Let us say it once more: The only 
qualitative standard is the degree of more or less perfect realization of 
the nature proper to a person. There can be no doubt that a woman 
who is perfectly woman is superior to a man who is imperfectly man, 
just as a farmer who is faithful to his land and performs his work 
perfectly is superior to a king who cannot do his own work. 

In the range of ideas we are dealing with, we should take it as being 
settled that manhood and womanhood are, above all, facts of an inner 
nature. It is possible to be a man as far as the body is concerned 
without being equally so in the soul (anima mulicris in corpore inckisa 
virili — the soul of a woman enclosed in a manly body), and the same 
is of course true of a woman. Such cases of asymmetry are due to 
various factors and are similar to cases encountered in the realm of 
race (individuals of a given race who have the psychic and spiritual 
characteristics of another race). This, however, does not prejudice 
the basic quality of the fluid that a being has, depending on whether 
that being is physically a man or woman; nor does it prejudice the 
unity of the process of sexual development. The phenomenon 
mentioned can be explained by the fact that in given cases this 
process is centered principally on a given domain, creating 
asymmetry because the remaining areas have not been developed to 
the same degree. From a typological point of view, however, the 
inner fact, the inner sex, is always decisive; a sexual development 
% Appearing only in physical terms, however advanced it may be, is in a 
certain sense truncated and empty. He who is not a man in spirit and 
soul is not truly a man, and the same applies to a woman. It is best to 
emphasize this point because we must bear it in mind in the law of 
sexual attraction mentioned earlier. The "proportions" of 
masculinity and femininity being integrated in turn, as ciled in ihai 
law, should be understood in a complete sense in nil their possible 
complexity. 



Eros and Sexual Love 



35 



In effect it is spiritual manliness that, even though only obscurely, 
excites arid" awakens the absolute woman; in the extreme case this 
manliness, beyond that of a warrior or ruler, leads even to the 
supernatural. We shall deal later on with the metaphysical as well as 
the existential side of such a case. An example created by art, Oscar 
Wilde's Salome, is illustrative, Salome does not see the centurion 
struck with love for her, who offers her everything and in the end 
kills himself for her. She is fascinated by Jokanan, the prophet and 
ascetic. She, the virgin, says to him, "I was chaste and you have 
defiled me; I was pure and you have filled my veins with 
fire. . . . What shall I do without you? Neither the rivers nor the 
great lakes will ever again extinguish the fire of my passion." 44 

One other point should be added to the possible differing degrees 
of sexual development in the physical and spiritual fields: namely, 
the varying conditions prevailing in inner sex as compared to bodily 
sex. The respective conditions are rigidly maintained only in the case 
of primitive individuals who are degraded compared with the pure 
type in question. If, on the other hand, the inner sex is sufficiently 
differentiated , it may assert itself with a certain independence from 
the physical conditions. In this way all the hormonic manipulations 
to which modern biologists are devoted actually have a necromantic 
character, being based on The idea that sex depends only on a 
different "hormonic formula." They can produce important effects 
in altering the true characteristics of sex only in animals and in little- 
differentiated humans, but no effects in complete, "typical" men and 
women. This independence from physical conditioning is also 
confirmed in some cases of eunuchs, whose physical impairment may 
not only fail to destroy their sexual impulse, but may also not harm 
their inner manhood. Examples of this have often been cited, 
including Narses, who was one of the best generals of later ancient 
times, Aristonicus, the ministers Fotinus and Eutropus, Solomon (a 
lieutenant of Belisarius), Haly (grand vizier of Suleiman II), the 
philosopher Favorinus, and even Abelard, among many others. 

Conditional Nature and Forms of Erotic Attraction 

For a complete definition of the factors involved in sexual choice, we 
must consider in greater detail the structure of the human being with 
reference less to modern studies than to traditional teachings. 

We have distinguished two main parts or layers of the human 
being, the essence and the persona; now we must take the more 
profound part, the essence, and divide it in two parts. Thus there will 
be three levels in all. The first is the level of the outer individual, 
which is a social construct, an entity whose form is fairly arbitrary, 
"live," and unsteady because of its art i Tidal nature. The second level 



36 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



belongs to the profound being , to the depth dimension, and is the site 
of what in philosophy has been called the principimn individuationis . 
It is here that those forces act by which a being is what it is, both 
physically and psychically, and is distinguished from every other 
being of the same species; thus it is also the site of the inborn nature 
of each person. These formative forces are called samskara or vasana 
. in the Hindu tradition; They not only are related to hereditary or 
racial factors, but are conceived as comprising heredity, as causes, 
preformations, and influences whose origin may lie beyond a single 
human life. 45 Psychologically, this level may be related to everything 
, in man that is his inborn character and nature, which we have called 
his "face," as opposed to his "mask." Contrary to everything 
belonging to the first and outermost of the three levels, that which 
refers to the second level has a marked degree of determination and 
stability. Thus Kant and Schopenhauer were led to talk of a 
"transcendental nature" of every individual as of a "noumenal" fact, 
that is, relative to the realm that lies behind the whole order of 
phenomena perceived in space and time. 

The third and deepest level concerns elementary forces superior 
and prior to individuation but acting as the ultimate seat of the 
individual. In this realm, where the first root of sex is found, the 
original force of eros is aroused. In itself, this level is prior to form 
and determination. Each process assumes a form and determination 
m the same measure that the energy of this level invests the two other 
levels and to the degree that the process is continued in them. 

With this background it is possible to apprehend every aspect of 
what happens in sexual attraction. At the deepest level, that 
attraction is something that goes beyond the individual, and erotic 
experience reaches this level in the final and traumatic form of coitus. 
In this regard, we see the validity of the saying that all women love 
only one man and all men love only one woman. Here there is a 
principle of indifference and interchangeability. By virtue of the 
analogical correspondences between upper and lower limits, this 
principle is in force in the blind impulse that drives a person toward 
someone of the opposite sex because ol the sexual polarity, an 
impulse proper to animal and brute forms of eros (the "animal lack of 
choice"). The same principle is in force in the positively 
disindividualized forms of eros, which can be seen in a Dionysiao 
experience, for example. Therefore, it is not always true to say that 
the most vulgar and animalistic form of love is that in which one loves 
not a woman, but the woman. Exactly the opposite may be irtic.'"* 
The same can be said concerning the fact that during ihc crisis of 
coitus, i he man almost loses his individuality; he can lose il in I wo 
opposite ways, since I here are I wo opposed possibilities of 



V. 



Eros and Sexual Love 



37 



d is individualization, two intoxications: the anagogical ascent above 
individuality and the eatalegieal descent below. The 



lacement of 

the individual by the species" at such moments is pure myth. Lastly, 
when it is said that love is born at the first instant or not at all, when 
we speak of a coup defoudre, this refers mainly to cases where, owing 
to special circumstances, it is the force of the deepest layer that acts in 
a direct, unhindered, predominant way. 

The first law that governs the process of sex at its third and deepest 
level is the one governing the desire for a complement, for the 
reintegration of the pure male quality and the pure female quality by 
the union of man and woman. At the boundary between the second 
and third layers, the intermediate and the deepest levels, the 
conditional qualities of bonds belonging to the individuation or 
inborn nature of a given being start to act almost at once. At this new 
stage, as regards erotic passion and inclination, it is no longer a 
matter of indifference what a given woman is besides being a woman 
and constituting the elementary, ontological complement of which 
we spoke. Here, above all, choice is influenced, for example, by the 
conditions of race, physical type, and character, and the whole may 
be accentuated and fixed in the mind until it creates the illusion of 
irreplaceability; 47 it is the belief in "one love only," the idea that a 
person can love only one given individual, one specific man or 
woman. And whenever all the elementary force belonging to the 
deepest layer and to the primary process fixes itself at this 
intermediate level — the level of individuation and of the 
"transcendental character" — the "fatal passion" will occur. This 
passion, as we shall see, is almost never happy if it stays in the 
human, profane field, inasmuch as a force and a charge are activated 
here which go beyond the individual; wherefore there often take 
place some real short circuits arid situations such as illustrated by 
Wagner's Tristan and Isolde. 

The intermediate level is generally also the level at which the 
woman loved is idealized; in it there arises the illusion that a woman 
is loved for one or another of her qualities, whereas that which is truly 
loved and which binds the lover is her naked being. When the 
profound force of eros does not permeate the intermediate level 
directly or fix itself there completely (as happens in the great majority 
of cases), there remains a certain margin of indctennination; instead 
of the '"sole, irreplaceable woman" there w T ilI be a given approximate 
type or genre, represented by more than one woman (or man) and 
constituting the condition for a strong enough attraction. But this 
freedom of movement or ability for displacement of the eros can also 
have another cause, namely the imperfect individuation of a given 
being. II I lie inner lace of a person is not very del mile, so equally will 



... 



38 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Eros and Sexual Love 



39 



the object of his desire be less definite and, within given limits, more 
changeable. The repetition of experience too, can undermine the 
stability proper to the first period of the erotic life. Thus Balzac 
found that in the first woman one loves, one loves everything, as if 
she were the only woman; afterward, one loves the woman in every 
woman. 

Let us now pass on to the level of the outer individual. When a 
person's center of gravity falls within this level, the change ability, we 
n£ mentioned and the indetermination of its proper sexual complement 
in his choices become excessive. As we said before, everything at this 
level is inorganic and lacks deep roots. Thus in some cases we may 
find the type of libertine who seeks "pleasure" alone and values a 
woman by the amount of pleasure he thinks she can give him; in 
every other respect one woman is for him more or less the same as 
another. In other cases the deciding factors may become social and 
environmental ones, such as class, fashion, tradition, and vanity. 
When this is the case, eros constellates itself on this level, and it is 
mainly by such qualities that norma!, "civilized," bourgeois love is 
defined. However, should cros suddenly recover its fundamental 
character and follow the conditional qualities belonging to its deepest 
layers, it will then act in a catastrophic manner on everything that has 
formed in the outer realm of the social individual and therefore in the 
sexual relations. In a case where a person finds his true complement, 
all the affinities determined by the level of his individual nature and 
samskara can upset or undermine everything that the social 
individual has won for himself in die framework of institutions of ihe 
civilization and society of a "divine right of love": "They [the lovers] 
have a share of divine right, notwithstanding human laws and 
conventions." 48 Such cases are numerous nowadays and have 
provided materia) for certain kinds of drama and literature, precisely 
because in modern times there exists the illusion that the relations 
between the sexes can be centered and systematized on the outer, 
social inorganic, artificial level. 49 

We can similarly explain the case of the libertine who becomes a 
victim of his own game and ends up falling in love with a particular 
woman, thus terminating the ability to change the object of his eros, 
or who undergoes maniacal sexual transformations as a result of 
playing with fire and provoking the activation of a "voltage" fitted to 
the deeper leveL 

These events can in turn act in a catastrophic manner even on the 
plane of the "one true love," just as the law of affinities in force on 
that plane (at the intermediate level) can act eatastrophically in die 
realm of ihe social individual and his arrangements whenever (he 
right complementary p;iriner is encountered. Then (lie I rue love fails 



once more, even the uniqueness of the "fatal passion/' But these 
cases are very rare in the field of profane love, and when they do 
happen, they are never evaluated according to their true nature. 

Another case that can be analyzed in this context is an elementary 
sexual passion and attraction that can be accompanied by disdain and 
even hatred between two lovers; it is the energy of the deeper plane 
that is acting to undermine all the determining affinities of character 
and all the values that would normally be focused on the intermediate 
plane. This case is symmetrical with that in which the affinities 
proper to the intermediate plane can, in their turn, negate everything 
which belongs to the outer realm of social morals and institutions. 

Finally, we can mention the fact that there are artificial means of 
: arousing in a more or less free state the elementary force of eros by 
neutralizing those more superficial layers, Here we can note the 
action of alcohol and some drugs; these were sometimes employed in 
i sexual rites, such as Dionysiac ceremonies and Tantrism* Love 
potions, whose true nature is lost to the modern world, have played a 
similar role. By this, as we shall see, eros can lead to some forms of 
daemonic worship as well as to sexual magic proper. 

In everything we have said so far we should never confuse the role 
of that which conditions with the role of that which determines. For a 
machine to function properly, it must consist of given parts that 
interact correctly; this is the condition. But when motor energy is 
lacking, even the most perfect machine will stay still. The same is 
true of all the conditional qualities in man which, on the two more 
superficial levels of his being, can theoretically correspond to the 
optimum as regards sexual attraction; but the primary force of eros 
must be roused with "voltage" in order to establish that magnetic or 
magic state which is the true foundation of all sexual love. 

In an ordinary individual, and especially in a civilized individual of 
the Western world, erotic experience often has a passive natures-It is 
as if the corresponding processes begin and proceed on their own 
without the action of man's .will. He cannot even focus these 
processes accurately on any of the three levels. This situation is 
considered so natural and normal that a person thinks his desire must 
be compulsive, beyond his control, or else he doubts the sincerity 
and depth of his feeling or desire. In languages of Latin origin, the 
word for "passion" expresses precisely the idea of submitting or 
suffering. The same is true of the German word Leidenschafl, from 
ihe verb leiden, which also means to "endure" or "suffer." 

The degree of passivity depends on the individuals and their inner 
differentiation. Furthermore, one must take into account differential 
psychology based on varying social institutions. For instance, the 
itiMihitioii ill polyj'amv luiiiirallv fosicrsa male lype in which lliee^o 



L 



40 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



has a greater degree of freedom as regards eros (with greater 
mutability and hence less stability). In this male type the erotic 
experience per se has more importance than the relationship with a 
specific woman as a person (an Arab proverb says: "One fruit, then 
another fruit"). Polygamy does not always correspond to the outer 
and inorganic situation proper to a libertine. The change from 
polygamy (or from marriages that allowed concubines as an integral 
part of the family) to monogamy, notwithstanding the conformist 
views prevailing today, is in no way a replacement of a lower type by a 
higher type of manhood, but is exactly the opposite: it is rather a 
symptom of a potential and much greater enslavement of man by eros 
and woman, and that is not a thing which marks a higher 
civilization. 50 

In the ancient world or among primitive peoples, we encounter the 
elements of a technique disposed to act on various ex is ten rial 
conditional qualities of eros. For the present we shall give only one 
example; the fact that among such peoples, wedding ceremonies are 
identified with love spells that arouse the force of attraction between 
the two sexes as an irresistible power. 51 According to our scheme, 
these spells arouse and activate the eros on the elementary plane and 
involve the risk of feeding a kind of devilry or possession. 

Before going any further, let us cast a glance over the ground we 
have covered. We have rejected every finahstic^ biological 
interpretation of eros, and we have dismissed the Freudian pleasure 
principle as no better than the theory that posits an imagined 
"instinct for reproduction" as the primary fact in the erotic impulse. 
The magnetic theory, in our view, corresponds more closely to 
reality. We have gone deeper into this theory by means of data taken 
from traditional teachings, which talk of a state or. fluid that 
determines itself "cataly deafly" in lovers through the presence of the 
basic forces (yin and yang) mat define sexual polarity and sexual 
development in general. The correlative thereof is a displacement of 
the plane of consciousness, which in turn becomes the cause of a 
magical activation of the power of the imagination and of a more or 
less strong obsession of the mind with one dominant idea. The 
ancient doctrine of an invisible change, produced in the blood when a 
person is seized by eros, has been restored to its true value. Finally, 
we have examined the conditional qualities linked to the existential 
desire for a complement within the framework of the doctrine of the 
manifold layers of a person. However, we have emphasized that the 
primary force and basis of everything shall always be deemed to be 
that which proceeds directly from the ratio of absolute manhood to 
absolute womanhood; and in this regard the more intense the 
process, with all its attendant effects of clcmeniary attraction, Ihe 



Eros and Sexual Love 



41 



more decided the differentiation of the sexes or, in other words, their 
sexual development. 

But here it may be said we have taken a circuitous route and evaded 
the essence. No matter how much we try to explain eros, we always 
come back to eros itself and inevitably meet the fundamental 
question: Why are man and woman attracted by each other? Having 
succeeded in recognizing this elementary and uncompromising fact, 
we must seek its meaning. This is precisely the same as asking what is 
the meaning of sex itself, and we now find ourselves led to the center 
of the metaphysics of sex proper. 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Myth of the Hermaphrodite 

Myth is the means by which the traditional world expressed the ulti- 
mate significance of being. The traditional myth has the value of a 
key, but it has been neglected as such in past attempts to explain 
myth within the framework of natural history, biology, and 
psychology. Our intent is to reinstate myth as a resource in order to 
explore the metaphysics of sex. 

Several myths lend themselves to this investigation, but let us 
choose one that is most familiar to Western man, while bearing in 
mind that the same meanings are contained in myths of other cul- 
tures. As a basis, then, let us look at the discussion of love in Plato's 
Symposium. Here, two theories of love, intermingled with the myth, 
are expounded by Aristophanes and Diotima respectively. We shall 
see that in a certain respect the two theories are complementary and 
illustrate the contradictions and problems of eros. 

The first theory concerns the myth of the hermaphrodite. As with 
almost all the myths introduced by Plato into his philosophy, we 
must suppose its origin to stem from the initiatic cermonies of the 
ancient Greek mysteries. Indeed the same theme winds its way below 
the surface of the most varied literature, ranging from the gnostics 
and ancient circles learned in the mystery cults down to authors of 
the Middle Ages and the early centuries of the modern era. 
Corresponding themes can also be found outside Europe. 

According to Plato 1 a primordial race existed "whose essence is 
now extinct," a race of beings who contained in themselves both 
principles, male and female. This hermaphroditic race "was extra- 
ordinarily strong and brave, and they nourished in their hearts very 
arrogant designs, even unto an attack upon the gods themselves. The 
traditions recounted by Homer regarding Otho and Ephialtes and 
their attempt to scale the sky so as to assault the gods is also attributed 
to this race." This is the same theme of the hubris of the Titans and 
Giants and of Prometheus. It can be found in many other myths as 
well — even, to a certain degree, in the biblical myth of Adam in the 
Garden of Eden, in which we find the promise "Ye shall be as gods." 

According to Plain, the gods did not strike the hermaphrodites 
with lij'hliriii}' a ,as || R y hud I he Giants., hut paralyzed I heir power and 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



43 



broke them in two. Thenceforth there arose beings of one sex or the 
other, male or female; they were, however, beings who retained the 
memory of their earlier state and in whom the impulse to reconstitute 
the primordial unity was kindled. According to Plato, in that impulse 
should be sought the ultimate metaphysical and everlasting meaning 
of eros: "From such an ancient time has love goaded human beings, 
one toward the other; it is inborn and seeks to renew our ancient 
nature in an endeavor to unite in one single being two distinct beings 
and, therefore, to restore human nature to good health. " z Quite apart 
from the joint participation of lovers in sexual pleasure, the soul of 
each of them "tends toward something different, which it cannot 
express but which it feels and reveals mysteriously" 3 Almost by way of 
a posteriori counterevidence, Plato makes Hephaestus ask the lovers: 

,Is it not perhaps this for which you long, a perfect, mutual fusion so that 
you will never be sundered from each other by day or night? If this is 
what you wish, I am ready to melt you and weld you together with fire 
into one and the same individual so as to reduce you to one single being 
instead of the two which you were beforehand; in this way you may live 
united to each other tor the whole of your lives and, when you are dead 
and down in Hades, you may be only one instead of two and may share 
together one single fate. Well, then, ask yourselves if this is what you 
want and whether you think you can be happy if you obtain it. 

"We know very well," said Plato, "that no one would refuse such a 
proposal or show himself desirous of something else, but each person 
without any hesitation would deem that he had finally heard 
expressed that which had certainly been his desire for a long time, 
namely to be united and fused with his beloved so as to form one 
single nature from two distinct beings. Now, the cause of this desire 
is to be sought in the fact that this was indeed our primitive nature 
when we constituted one unit which was still whole; it is really the 
burning longing for this unity which bears the name oi love." 
Almost like a symbol is "the clinging of the two parts to each other, as 
if in a desire to pervade each other wholly/' 5 

Within this context, the accessory elements that are metaphorical 
and "mythical" in a negative sense should be separated from the fun- 
damental concept. For example, the primordial beings whom Plato 
has described, even recounting their physical features, ought not, of 
course, to be conceived as actual members of some prehistoric race 
whose remains or fossils w r e would expect to find. Instead, we should 
conceive of a state y a spiritual condition of origins, not so much in the 
historical sense as in the framework of an ontology, of a doctrine of 
i he manifold si ales <>! being. By stripping away the overlying myth, 
we can timlersiiuid I he siaic as one ol 'absolute fa^ (neither divided 
nor dual), <>( a eoniplele enlilv or pure imily which, in risclf, is llie 



44 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



state of Immortality. This last point is confirmed in the doctrine ex- 
pounded by Diotima later on in the Symposium and also set forth in 
the PkaedruS) where, in reference to so-called Platonic love and to the 
theory of beauty, the connection between the ultimate goal of eros 
and immortality is explicit. 

A second aspect of Plato's myth is a variation of the traditional 
theme of the Fall. The differentiation of the sexes corresponds to the 
condition of a divided being, finite and mortal, partaking in the dual 
condition of one who has life, not in himself, but in another being; 
this is not the original state of being. In this respect a parallel could be 
made with the biblical myth, inasmuch as the Fall of Adam has as its 
outcome his exclusion from the Tree of Life. The Book of Genesis 
also speaks of the hermaphroditic nature of the primordial being 
made in the image of God ("Male and female created He them"). 
Some have attributed to the name of Eve, symbol of the complement 
of man, the meaning of "life," or "living." As we shall see, in the 
interpretation of the Kabbala, the sundering of the woman-life from 
the hermaphrodite is related to the Fall and ends with the equivalent 
I of the exclusion of Adam from the Tree of Life lest he should 
J "become as one of us" and "live forever" (Gen. 3: 22). 

As a whole, the myth of Plato alludes to the change from unity to 
duality, from being to the loss of being and of absolute life. Its dis- 
tinctive character and importance, however, lie precisely in its appli- 
cation to the duality of the sexes and direct us to the hidden meaning 
and ultimate object of eros. The purpose set forth in the Upanishads 
is the same when it speaks of what is really sought in the course of 
ordinary life: "It is not for love of woman that woman is desired by 
, man, but rather for love of the atmmi* (for the principle "all is light, 
all is immortality"). 6 In its most profound aspect, eros embodies an 
v.. * impulse to overcome the consequences of the Fall, to. leave., the 
restrictive world of duality, to restore the primordial .state*, to 
surmount the condition of dual existentiality broken .and conditioned 
by theJLoiher-" This is the absolute meaning of eros; this is the 
mystery hidden behind man's drive toward woman in an elementary 
state. It precedes all the conditional qualities that human love shows 
f. in its infinite varieties in beings who arc not even absolute, men or 
absolute women but merely by-products of one or the other. Here is 
the key to all the metaphysics of sex: "Through the Dyad toward the 
Unity." Sexual love is the most universal form of man's obscure 
search to eliminate duality for a short while, to existentially overcome 
the boundary between ego and not-ego, between self and not-self. 
Flesh and sex arc the tools for an ecstatic approximation of the 
achievement of unity. The etymology of the word omwp, as given by 
a medieval "Worshipper of Love," all hough unfounded, is 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



45 



nonetheless meaningful: "The particles means 'without*; mot [mors] 
means 'death*: If we join them together, we get 'without death' or life 
everlasting." 7 

Fundamentally, therefore, by loving and desiring, a man seeks the 
confirmation of self, participation in absolute being, the destruction 
of sieresis, and the loss and existential anguish associated with it. 
When looked at in this light, many aspects of profane love and of sex- 
uality are clarified. At the same time, we can already foresee the path 
leading to the sphere of mystic eroticism and of the sacred or magical 
use of sex belonging to so many ancient traditions. For already at the 
beginning of our inquiry, we have revealed the elementary basis of 
the erotic impulse to be metaphysical and not physical. Therefore 
our way is now open to the series of investigations that will be the 
subjects of the subsequent chapters. 

In the meantime we must not overlook a particular point. As we 
have seen, Plato formulated the doctrine of the hermaphrodite in 
such a way that he gave it a "Promethean" appearance. If the mythi- 
cal beings of earliest times were such that they could strike terror in 
the gods and vie with them, then we can hypothesize that eros — the 
ultimate search for integration — is not so much a nebulous mystic 
state as a condition of being that is also potency. This factor will have 
a bearing in our study of the initiatic forms of sexual magic, but this 
motive must be stripped of pathos. In a wider context, Promethea- 
nism can shed its negative character of breach of trust. The tradition 
that gave form to the myth of Prometheus and the Giants is also that 
of the Heraclean ideal. This ideal is an equivalent to the aim pursued 
by the Titans; it belongs in general to those who, despite everything, 
pursue access to the Tree of Life. When Heracles attains enjoyment 
of the apples that confer immortality (according to one version of the 
legend, it is Prometheus who shows him the way), he attains Hebe, 
everlasting youth, on Olympus, not as a violator of a trust but rather 
as an ally of the Olympians. 

Related to this, we can allude to the fact that the Promethean 
moment latent in eros is effectively attested to in scattered accounts 
belonging to various traditions. We shall limit ourselves here to 
recalling that in the cycle of the Holy Grail (a cycle replete with 
initiatory content under the guise of chivalric adventures), the 
temptation that woman represents for an elected knight is sometimes 
an ribuied to Lucifer, 8 thus taking on a very different meaning from 
the moralistic notion of the mere seduction of the flesh. Moreover, 
Wolfram von Fschenbach relates the fall of Amfortas to his having 
chosen "Love" for his device — a device, says the poet, that is not in 
keeping with humility.'' This is tantamount U> saying that in love is 
hidden the opposite of humility, namely I he hubris or overweening 



, 



46 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



pride of the "unified" beings of the origin of mankind. Moreover, it 
should be noted that Wolfram speaks of the "opening of the path to 
the Grail with arms in hand," that is, in a violent manner, and that 
the main hero of the poem, Parzifal, in fact reaches that situation 
with a sort of rebellion against God. 10 Now, the opening of the path. 
to the Holy Grail is more or less the same as the opening of the way to 
the Tree of Life or everlasting life, for the rather flaccid framework of 
Wagner's Parsifal in no way corresponds to the original predominant 
themes and should not be taken into account at all. Last, it should be 
noted that the circles in which sexual magic and mystic eroticism 
have been practiced have openly professed the doctrine of "unity," 
thus denying any true ontological distance between creator and 
creature, with a contempt for both human and divine laws as well. 
These circles range from the Hindu Siddha and Kaula of the "Way of 
the Left Hand" down to the Brothers of the Free Spirit of the 
Christian Middle Ages, to the Sabbatism of Jakob Franck, and to 
Aleister Crowley in our own century. 11 

But we must emphasize that these references are to be purged of 
their problematic "Promethean'' aspect and are exclusively 
concerned with "guided" experiences of eros outside the realm of 
common love between men and women. In conclusion, we should 
add that in the work of Plato himself, 12 the recovery, the return to the 
ancient condition and the "supreme happiness," understood as being 
the "highest good" to which eros can lead, are associated with the 
overcoming of godlessness, the prime cause of the existential 
separation of man from the divine in general. It is only a different 
orientation that, alongside some morphological likenesses, 
differentiates Prometheus from Heracles, or the experience 
mentioned from Satanism; but this is not the time to dwell on that 
subject. 

Eros and the Various Degrees of Intoxication with It 

We must next consider the theory of love that Plato made Diotima 
expound; but first it is best to mention Plato's statement concerning 
the higher form of eros as a state, regarded simply as a content of the 
conscious self. Eros is called a "mighty daemon" in the Symposium; 
"being an intermediate between the nature of a god and the nature of 
a mortal," he fills the gap between the one and the other. 13 In the 
Phaedrus> a great deal is said about mama. It is hard to translate this 
word correctly since today it connotes something unpleasant and 
mad; the same can be said of furore (frenzy), which was the 
translation adopted by the humanists of the Renaissance (the "heroic 
frenzies" in Giordano Bruno). We should rather speak of a anile of 
rapture* ol "divine inspiration.," of exaltation or lucid intoxication, 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



47 



and thereby we are brought back precisely to what we said before 
regarding the raw material of every erotic state. At this stage Plato 
emphasized an essential point by distinguishing between two kinds 
of "mania," one of which "arises from human illness and the other 
from divine exaltation, whereby we feel ourselves to be extraneous to 
normal laws and customs." 14 The second of them, said Plato, "is far 
from frightening," for great benefits may arise from it; and in a 
specific reference to eros, he said, "Very good luck lies in the mania 
which the gods lavish on us by causing love to be born in the soul of 
him who loves and of him who is loved."' 

What is more important here is that eros as "mania" is introduced 
into a wider context, which makes its possible metaphysical context 
very noticeable. In fact, Plato distinguishes four kinds of favorable 
manias, which are not pathological or subhuman, and refers them to 
four divinities respectively: the mania of love, linked to Aphrodite 
and Eros; the prophetic mania of Apollo; the mania of the initiates of 
Dionysus; and the prophetic mania of the Muses. 16 MarsilioFicino 1 
would say that these are "the kinds of exaltation which God inspires 
in us by raising man above man, and this exaltation changes man into 
God." Apart from "poetic mania," which was only capable of having 
a character that was not profane in ages when art was not a subjective 
matter and when a poet was also a minstrel and poetry a song, the 
common basis of all such forms of mania is a state of exaltation able to 
bring about a self-provoked condition of transcendence and also 
varieties of a supersensual experience. This is the case with a lover as 
much as with a Dionysiac initiate or with anyone whose vision 
surpasses the limits of time or with a person undergoing a magical 
experience. 18 It is only odd that neither Plato nor his commentators 
have mentioned a further variety of the same lucid and mystical kind 
of exaltation (which leads men upward): the heroic kind, which 
could be allotted to the sign of Mars, is singular inasmuch as the 
ancients considered some cases in which heroic experience, too, 
could offer initiatory possibilities. 19 Last, we may recall the kind of 
holy intoxication proper to the Corybantes and Curetes with their 
corresponding techniques, which bear an unmistakable relationship 
lo dance. 

In any case, the references are precise. Thus Plato recognizes one 
tree trunk, of which sexual eros is a branch, a specialized type. Its 
raw material is an animation and liberating exaltation (that almost 
grails a higher life onto human life in mythological terms; a fertiliz- 
ing and integrating possession by a daemon or god), which, if it 
obeyed only its own metaphysics, as defined by the myth of the her- 
maphrodite, would have as iis highest possibility a tcietc or initiation 
(as Plalo said >„ ;in equivalent of the inilialie ceremony of the Greek 



48 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



49 



mysteries. Moreover, it is noteworthy that the word "orgy," now 
associated only with the unleashing of the senses and sexuality, was 
linked in the beginning to the attribute "holy/' the "holy" orgies. In 
fact, orgia meant the state of inspired exaltation that began the 
initiatory process in the ancient Greek mysteries. But when this 
exaltation of eros, itself akin to other experiences of a supersensual 
nature, becomes individualized as a longing that is only 
carnal — when it becomes conditioned instead of itself conditioning, 
because it is wholly linked to the biological determinisms and muddy 
sensations of the lower nature — then it deteriorates and ends finally 
in the form constituted by mere "pleasure," or venereal lust. 

Here we must distinguish various degrees. Pleasure has a wide- 
spread and still ecstatic nature when the "magnetic" moment of love 
with its consequent fluidic amalgamation of two beings is quite in- 
rense. As this intensity lessens or as a lover becomes used to perform- 
ing the physical act with the same person, the pleasure tends more 
and more to be localized bodily in given zones and essentially in the 
sexual organs. Man is notoriously more predisposed than woman to 
this further deterioration. In the end, we are left with a dissociated 
pleasure, detached from every profound experience. In general, 
"pleasure" is the effective breakdown of the state of mania, of pure, 
exalted, and lucid intoxication induced by a supersensual element* 
This condition represents the counterpart of a miscarriage of the 
impulse of eros, as an impulse directed toward the absolute being and 
the immortal, within the circle of physical generation; to this will 
correspond the other theory of love, as expounded by Diotima, 
which we shall consider below. 

In the present context, it may be worthwhile to refer again for an 
instant to the Platonic difference between two kinds of mania so as to 
develop their respective natures. In general, when this state occurs, 
the faculties of a normal individual are suspended and his "thought 
power" (manas in Hindu terminology) is shut off or transported, 
being subject to a different force. This force may be ontologically 
higher or lower than the principle of the human personality. Hence 
there arise the possibility and concept of an ecstatic intoxication that 
also has a decidedly regressive character. Sexual magic in particular 
rests on this very thin dividing line. 

To use a theoretical example, we may mention the divergent inter- 
pretation given by Ludwig Klages. Klages took up in part the 
viewpoint of Plato and emphasized the elementary nature of the 
intoxication or mania that constitutes eros, and he recognized its 
nonphysical dimension and ecstatic capability; bill the crilical 
difference in his interprelalion was that "it is nol man's spirit bill his 
soul which is sol live |in ecstasy], and his soul is freed not from Ills 



»20 



body but from his spirit."*" However, in Klages s work, "spirit" is 
not the spirit but basically a synonym for "thought power"; yet it is 
true that for him the "soul" corresponds to the almost unconscious, 
lower layers in a human being that border on the bios. It corresponds 
to the yin (or female, dark, nighttime) parr and not to the wag (male, 
light, daytime) part of a human being. Thus the ecstasy that he 
speaks of could well be called an earthly or perhaps even a daemonic 
ecstasy. Its emotive content had already been described in Hindu 
tradition with the word rasavadana. 

A well-differentiated phenomenology of mania and of eros exists, 
therefore, and from a practical viewpoint, its importance can never 
be sufficiently emphasized. However, it is certain that both the fore- 
going negative possibility and a positive possibility of a divine exalta- 
tion are equally far from one based on iDathological origin and from 
the brutish and blind impulse of eros on an animal level. Neither the 
ethnologists nor the historians of religions nor the psychologists have 
taken any notice of such important distinctions. 

The Biological Treatment and Fall of Eros 

In Plato's Symposium^ Diotima seems at first to argue against Aristo- 
phanes. She says that all men in love tend toward the good and that 
"the everlasting essence of love consists in possessing the good," not 
the half that is lacking, but the whole. 2 1 But in reality the two are the 
same thing expressed in different words, for according to the Helle- 
nistic concept, the "good" had a meaning that was ontological but not 
moral, to the degree that it was identified with the state of being in a 
lofty sense, with that which is perfect and whole; and the myth of the 
hermaphrodite alludes to that and to nothing else under the cloak of 
the fable. Diotima then says that "the ardent concern and tension" of 
anyone tending toward that higher state take on a specific figure of 
love in relation to "the creative force inborn in all men according to 
the body and to the soul," the force that aims at the "act of procrea- 
tion in beauty." And this is the case "also in the union of man with 
woman." She then states, "In the living, which is also mortal, this 
union is the root of immortality."' 2 

The meaning already given for the metaphysics of sex receives 
here, on the one hand, a confirmation. As a wish for the everlasting 
possession of good, love is also the wish for immortality. 23 On the 
oihcr hand, we pass with Diotima's doctrine to a "physics" of sex that 
almost strangely anticipates the views of Schopenhauer and the 
school of Darwin. Mortal nature, overworked and subdued by the 
onslaught of love, seeks lo reach immortality in the form of the 
continuation of the species by fynrradnii. "Only in this way," says 
Dioiimn, 'Villi |cvcrl:isiiiij', hlc| In- achieved by I he act ol procreation 



A 



50 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



51 



inasmuch as the act always leaves a different being alive to take the 
place of the aged being." Thus she speaks of man as almost a 
superindividual who continues through the unbroken chain of 
generations owing to "eros, the procreator." It can be stated that no 
living being ever retains within himself the same qualities; yet he is 
always considered as having one identical personality while he goes 
on renewing himself forever, even though such parts as his hair or 
flesh, bones or blood, are continually changing- This is also the 
process through which no human being perishes: not that he remains 
himself, as happens with a god, but through ensuring that when he 
grows old, deteriorates, and dies, he will be replaced with another 
individual. It is indeed immortality in the sense of the perpetuity of 
the species. 24 And Diotima speaks exactly like a follower of Darwin 
when she explains in these terms the deep, natural urge to ensure that 
one's own stock does not die out but also the urge that, blindly, 
without being guided by any reasoning, drives animals not merely to 
copulation but to sacrifices of all kinds so as to feed, protect, and 
defend their offspring, 25 

It was not by chance that this theory was put into the mouth, first, 
of a woman and, second, of Diotima of Mantineia, an initiate of those 
mysteries which may well be called the "mysteries of the Mother" 
and which take us back to the pre-Hellenic, pre -Indo-European sub- 
stratum of a civilization oriented toward the earth and the rule of 
woman. Let us reserve the right to return to this subject later and say 
here only that in the eyes of such a civilization, which set the maternal 
mystery of physical generation at the summit of its religious concept, 
the individual has no existence on its own; it is a fleeting thing that 
lasts for a day. Only the maternal cosmic womb is everlasting, for the 
individual beings return and are dissolved in it but also swarm forth 
forever from it, just as new leaves sprout on a tree in the place of those 
which have fallen. This is the opposite of true Olympian immor- 
tality, which implies instead the abrogation of the naturalistic and 
earthly-motherly bond, the departure from the everlasting circle of 
generation, and the ascent toward the region of immutability and 
pure being, 26 Beyond these aspects of a disconcerting Darwinian 
modernism, therefore, the spirit of the old Pelasgian and chthonic 
religion of the Mother shows itself in the theory of eros expounded by 
Diotima. We shall see later on what are "the higher, revealing 
mysteries" to which she alludes. 27 Here it is essential to note that in 
the theory of the hermaphrodite and in that of the survival of the 
species, we have two opposing concepts: The iirsl has a 
metaphysical, Uranian, virile, and perhaps Promethean spirit, 
whereas the oilier has an earthly-maternal and "physical" spirit. 
I .caving aside this antithesis, il is even more important lo consider 



the point of the ideal transition of one view into the other and its 
meaning. It is clear that "earthly immortality" or "temporal immor- 
tality" is a pure illusion. At such a level absolute being escapes into 
the individual endlessly; and, by generating, the individual will end- 
lessly give life anew to another being affected by the same impotent 
impulse. 28 Moreover, a bloodline may meet its end, for a stock can be 
wiped out and disaster can bring an end to the existence not only of a 
family but indeed of a whole race; therefore, the mirage of that 
immortality is highly misleading. At this rate, we may well intro- 
duce the mythical, Schopenhauerian daemon of the species and say 
that lovers are deceived by him: Pleasure is the bait of generation, 
and that bait is also the charm and beauty of woman; although lovers 
deem they are living a higher life during the exaltation of their coitus 
and are grasping at unity, they are actually serving the purpose of 
generation. Kierkegaard perceived that during their union lovers 
form one ego only but are nonetheless deceived, because at the same 
point the species triumphs over the individual. This contradiction, as 
he said, is even more ridiculous than everything for which Aristo- 
phanes found love to be a laughingstock. He noted rightly that a 
higher prospect should not be excluded: One could believe that if 
lovers did not attain an immortal and unified nature, yet by agreeing 
to act as tools for generation and sacrificing themselves, they could 
see that goal attained in a being they generated. But this does not 
happen; the son is not born as an everlasting being that ends the 
series and goes upward, but is born as a being exactly the same as they 
are. 29 This is the everlasting vain filling of the barrel of the Danaides 
or i he eternal weaving of the rope of Oknos, which the donkey of the 
underworld continually gnaws away. 50 

But this vain and hopeless vicissitude in the "circle of generation" 
also hides its own metaphysic: the obscure impulsion toward abso- 
luie being, while deteriorating and deviating, passes into that which 
in hidden behind animal copulation and procreation. Its purpose is 
l lie search for a substitute for the real need of a metaphysical confir- 
mation of oneself; and the phenomenology of eros follows this 
descent, this degradation. From exaltation, eros becomes an ever 
more ex I rover ted desire, thirst, and carnal lust, which ends in pure 
animal sexual instinct. Eros then has a syncope in the moment and 
spasm which results in the collapse into physical, sensual pleasure, a 
\i:i!e more conditioned, particularly in males, by the physiological 
process essentially directed toward insemination. The wave swells, 
Knurs in its peak, reaches the dazzling instant of coitus and of the 
destruction of the dyad, only lobe overt urned by the experience. It is 
dt owned :ind dissolved in what is in foci called "pleasure." Liquida 
mhtpun or liquid pleasure, a phenomenon ol dissolution Js the Latin 




52 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



expression rightly mentioned by Michelstaedter. 31 Yet it is as if the 
force has escaped the hand of him who sets it in motion: It passes into 
the realm of the bios', it becomes "instinct," almost an impersonal and 
automatic process. Nonexistent as a fact of the erotic consciousness, 
the generative instinct becomes real in terms ol the id (to use the 
psychoanalytic term), of an obscure gravitation, of a vital compulsion 
that conceals itself from consciousness and undermines and 
overthrows it. This happens not because of an instinct for species 
survival but because the will of the individual to overcome his own 
finite nature can never be wholly uprooted, silenced, or repressed* 
That will survives desperately in this obscure and demoniac form, 
which provides the power (dynamis), the primordial impulse toward 
the everlasting circle of generation. In the same relationship as that 
existing between temporality and eternity, in the succession and 
repetition of individuals according to the "immortality in the 
Mother," it is still possible to have a last, misleading reflection of the 
immortal. But on such a level the very boundary between human 
world and animal world fades away little by little. 

As we said at the beginning, the normal explanatory process is to 
be reversed: The lower is to be deduced from the higher, not the 
other way around. Physical instinct starts from a metaphysical 
instinct, and the primordial impulse is directed toward ** being." It is 
in fact a metaphysical impulse: Both the biological impulse toward 
self-conservation and that toward reproduction are "precipitates," 
materializations that are created at their own level by their physical 
determinisms. Having exhausted human phenomenology, which 
starts from a hyper physic at exaltation and a transfiguring, mystical 
intoxication and finds its lower limit in the truly carnal orgasm of a 
generative function, we pass on to the forms of sexuality proper to 
animals. We can see in various animal species some degenerate 
hyperdevelopments of certain potentials latent in human beings, 
some ending in culs-de-sac and corresponding To human types that 
embody a dissociated, grotesque, obsessive development of those 
potentialities. It is therefore necessary to consider every possible 
likeness between the sex and love life of man and that of the animal 
world. Obscure and extreme distortions in one or another aspect of 
human eros are often to be found in the animal world as natural 
developments. 

Thus we can see the magnetism of sex driving and guiding — some- 
times by telepathy— some species in nuptial migrations that cover ex- 
traordinary distances and involve extreme privations and conditions: 
thai kill a large pari of the migrants on the way. No sacrifice is 
spared, provided thai I lie place is reiichcd where I ho seeds can he 
Icvimdaled or I he eggs laid. We can sec the manifold tragedies ol 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



53 



sexual choice among wild beasts, the blind and often destructive urge 
toward the sexual contest, which is fought, not for ownership of the 
female, but for possession of "being." The farther away the level at 
which that "being" can be found, the more savage the search for it. 
We can see the metaphysical cruelty of the absolute woman minia- 
turized in the female mantis, which kills her mate during coitus as 
soon as she has used him. We can see the same phenomena in the life 
of the Hymenopiera and other species: deadly marriages, with males 
who die after the procreative act or are slain and eaten during its very 
occurrence, and females who die after having laid their fertilized 
eggs. We can see in the Batrachta the absolute coitus, not interrupted 
by death-dealing wounds or mutilations, and in the love play of snails 
we can note the ultimate limit of the need for full prolonged contact 
and of the sadism of multiform penetration. We can see human 
"proletarian" fertility become pandemic and swarming endlessly in 
the lowest species until the level is reached where, with the 
hermaphroditism of the mollusks and tunicates and the 
parthenogenesis of the one- cell organisms, of the protozoans and 
some of the latest metazoans, the same principle is encountered, 
although inverted and lost in the blind and nondifferentiated bios, as 
we find at the beginning of the whole descending series. All these 
forms are described by Remy de Gourmont in his Physique de 
rumour. 32 But this whole world of correspondences now appears in a 
different light; those found here are no longer the antecedents of 
human eros, the evolutionary stages lower than it, but are the liminal 
forms of its involution and degeneration under automated, 
demonized impulses, cast into the limitless and insensate. But how 
can we fail to see that the metaphysical root is more apparent in 
certain features of this animal eros (where we normally only 
recognize the imperative of the "survival of the species") than in 
many disintegrating and "spiritual" forms of human love? For, 
according to an inverted reflex, we can read there that which, beyond 
1 1 to fleeting life of the individual, is brought about by the will to 
absolute being. 

These meanings also provide the right points of reference for un- 
derstanding the more profound factor acting behind daily human ex- 
istence itself. At the level of the life of relationships, man needs love 
and woman to rid himself of existential sorrow and to invent for him- 
Ncir si meaning lor his existence; he seeks unconsciously a substitute 
ol some kind or another and accepts and nourishes every illusion, 
|ark London was right to talk of the "subtle atmosphere spread 
iibroad by the female sex., an atmosphere which we do not notice 
while we arc immersed in it; bin when it is missing, we feel a growing 
void in our existence and are (or men led by a vague wish lor some- 



54 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



55 



thing which is so indefinite that we cannot explain it." This feeling 
acts as a substratum for the sociology of sex, for sex itself is a factor in 
the life of companionship, ranging from marriage to the desire to 
have a family, offspring, and lineage. This desire becomes ever more 
alive the further we fall from the magical plane of sex and the more we 
become dimly aware of the delusion of the most profound impulse of 
our being, behind the gleaming mirage of the moments of first con- 
tacts and the summits of passion. This realm, within which domesti- 
cated man normally encloses sex, especially in our times, may well be 
called the realm of the second-degree by-products of the metaphysics 
of sex and, according to the meaning given by Michelstaedter to such 
expressions, a world of "rhetoric" that replaces the world of "persua- 
sion" and truth. 33 Still further toward the edge and as if going in a 
direction of its own, we find the abstract and vicious hunt for 
venereal pleasure as a drug and liminal soothing agent for the lack of 
meaning in finite existence; but that is a subject to which we shall 
return. 

Aphrodite Urania; Eros and Beauty 

We said earlier that in the Symposium, after having spoken about 
temporal immortality in the species, Diotima alluded to "higher 
revealing mysteries." Then Diotima took up a theory that had been 
attributed to Pausanias, namely that two kinds of love exist because 
there are two Aphrodites, Aphrodite Urania and Aphrodite 
Pandemia. 44 The first embodies love of a divine nature; the second, 
profane love. 

This leads to a problematical issue. It is a question of humanism, 
not of higher mysteries, when Diotima contrasts those who give life to 
immortal children such as artists, lawgivers, moralists, and the like 
with those who procreate carnally. "Many forms of worship have 
already been directed toward the former," says Diotima, "because of 
such unusual children, whereas no one has yet attained such honor in 
children produced according to human nature." Immortality, 
reduced to mere survival in fame and in the memory of mankind, is of 
course even more short-lived than that proper to survival of the 
species; here we are in a wholly profane realm, almost in the sphere 
where the highly mortal members of the Academic Franca ise have 
been called ironically Les Itnmortets. But it was already a teaching of 
the Hellenic mysteries that men w T ith good cause to aspire to such 
immortality, such as Epaminondas or Agesilaus, could not expect lo 
obtain in life after death the privileged destiny that even evildoers, if 
initialed, would enjoy. Xu Diotima, in her belief dial sueh 
immorlali/inj: human works had been inspired by the love for 
beaut v* passes on lo deal with love as dependent on beaut v ami 



expounds a kind of mystic and ecstatic aesthetic* 

Such a theory offers little that can be used in solving the problem as 
we have stated it. It sets out with a dualism that basically desexualizes 
the whole. In fact, it now speaks of an eros that is no longer one 
aroused by woman or by a magnetic relationship with woman, but 
t hat is aroused by beauty as an idea: a beauty that has become little by 
little no longer the beauty of bodies or of a particular being or object 
but an abstract or absolute beauty. Even the myth that plays the 
key part has changed; eros under the sign of Aphrodite Urania is 
identified with that which in the Phaedrus is based on anamnesis, on 
"memory" not of the hermaphroditic state but of the state before 
birth when the soul was contemplating the divine world and thus 
tl t here was fulfilled that which it is legitimate to call the most blessed 
of initiations, celebrated as perfect oeings." 3 The love that is 
properly linked to sex is, instead, presented as the effect of the black 
steed prevailing over the white one and pulling upward the symbolic 
chariot of the soul,* 9 or almost as a fall due to a defect in 
transcendental memory: "He who has not the blessed visions of 
above fresh in his memory or has forgotten them wholly, cannot 
recall at once the essence of beauty when he sees its image down here 
on earth; he does not, therefore, worship it when he sees it but 
instead gives himself over to pleasure and proposes only to lie with 
beauty and beget offspring in the manner of the beasts*" 40 Hence 
arises the following rather problematical definition of the love of that 
day: "Passion, which is not coupled with reason, but which 
overpowers contemplation of all that is beautiful and lets itself be 
earned away by the pleasure aroused by beauty, being made ever 
stronger by kindred passions to covet the beautiful as expressed in 

I lie physical, this is that which is called love." 41 Having defined true 
love as the "desire for beauty," Marsilio Ficino 42 goes so far as to say 
that "the venereal fury," "the appetite for coitus and love are not only 
i ml t he same emotions but show themselves to be the opposite of each 
oilier."* 9 

in conclusion, we can only use the idea of an eros that through 

I I a imposition and exaltation is prevented from animalistic and gener- 
al ive degradation, provided that eros continues to be related to 
woman and sexual polarity; we shall return to this question when 
dealing, for instance, with the inner side of the courtly love of 
medieval limes. Instead, the theory of love as the desire for pure, 
uhslrui t beauty may even remain within the field of metaphysics but 
In certainly outside the field of the metaphysics of sex. There are also 
reasons |i> don hi whel her t hat theory is linked to some teaching in the 
mysteries, as I )iotima claimed, hoi whereas we can see I he I heme ol 
the liei'iiinplit'odilr rerun inj". in I lie study of llie mysteries and in the 



- 



56 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



secret lore of most traditions, the same cannot be said of "pi atonic 
love." 44 Even in subsequent developments, in the Renaissance, 
platonic love is almost exclusively presented as a simple philosophic 
theory; we know of no mystery schools nor mystical teachings in 
which such a theory led to a technique of ecstasy that was actually 
followed. Plotinus' mysticism of beauty has quite a different 
character. The beautiful in Plotinus refers rather to the "idea that 
binds and dominates hostile nature, lacking forms ." From this 
context there arises also a relationship, outside the sphere of erotic 
tension and sex, of beauty proper to a form and to an inner domain 
manifested "in the greatness of mind, justice, pure wisdom, manly 
energy with a stern countenance, in the dignity and modesty shown 
in a fearless, steadfast, and impassive demeanour and, even higher 
still, in an understanding worthy of a god, shining over everything 
outside itself." 45 Finally, we cannot say to what extent the validity of 
Kant, Schopenhauer, and recent aesthetics depends on modern 
man's having a different constitution. According to them, the special 
nature of aesthetic feeling — that is, of the emotion aroused by the 
"beautiful" — is its "Apollinism," its lack of relationship to the 
faculty of desire or to eros. If one wants to take sex into account, it is a 
banal enough observation to say that a woman considered solely from 
the point of view of pure beauty is not the most suitable woman to 
arouse sexual magnetism and desire; she will be like a nude marble 
statue with a perfect form which, when contemplated, may indeed 
arouse an aesthetic emotion bul which provides nothing in terms of 
eros, The yin quality is lacking, the daemonic, the unfathomable, the 
fascinating. 46 Very often the women who have the greatest success 
cannot be rightly called beautiful. 

Thus the Platonic theory of beauty constitutes something in itself 
that is hard to understand in existential terms. As a whole, platonic 
love can be compared to a very special intoxication, half magical and 
half intellectual (the intoxication of pure forms). As such, it is dis- 
tinct from the "humid way" of the love of the mystics and inseparable 
from the spirit of a civilization such as the Hellenic one, that saw the 
chrism of the divine in everything having a perfect limit and form. 4 ' 
When applied to the realm of the relations between the sexes, how- 
ever, concepts of this kind lead to a paralyzing dualism. We see thai 
Giordano Bruno, in treating "heroic fury" with reference to the 
Platonic theory, begins with a violent onslaught against anyone who 
obeys love and desire for woman, whom he ruthlessly describes: 
"That final insult and ill-deed of nature, which under the guise of 
beauty tricks us with a surface, a shadow, a ghost , a dream , a ( niveau 
incarnation directed toward ihe service of procreation; a beauty 
whirl i comes and r.urs, is horn and die:-;, blossoms ami [esters; and 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



57 



woman is a little beautiful outside, for her true inward self contains 
permanently a potpourri, a warehouse, a grab bag, a market of all the 
filth, poisons, and harmful substances our stepmother Nature has 
been able to produce; which, after having collected that seed which 
served her> comes often to pay with a stench, a repentance, sadness, 
weariness . , , and with other ills which can be seen throughout the 
whole world."' Therefore, Giordano Bruno thinks it right that 
women should be loved and honored only "as much as is owed to 
diem for the little they give at that time and on that occasion, unless 
they have some virtue other than a natural one, namely the virtue of 
[hat beauty and splendor and service without which they must be 
deemed to have been born more uselessly into the world than any 
diseased fungus which occupies the ground to the detriment of better 
plants/' 49 This clarifies how the concept of the double eros leads to a 
degradation of sexual love, to its fall into savage conditions and to a 
failure to recognize its most profound possibilities. The same 
t riordano Bruno, in the epilogue of the work we have quoted, makes 
Julia, the symbol of real womanhood, say to her lovers, whom she 
refuses, that "it is precisely because of [her] so reluctant and yet 
simple and innocent cruelty** that she has shown them incomparably 
greater favors "than [they] could have obtained otherwise, however 
great [her] kindness"; for, diverting them from human love, she had 
directed their eros toward divine beauty. 50 Here the separation is 
complete; the direction differs from one that has any connection with 
sex whatsoever, no matter how exalted its form. 51 

Plotinus knew well how to keep this Platonic order of ideas within 
its proper limits by considering not only him who "loves beauty 
alone" but also "him who carries love as far as union and also has a 
wish lor immortality through mortals and who seeks for the beautiful 
ma procreation and form of beauty which continues. Thus those who 
love beauty in bodies, although theirs is a mixed love, still love 
heai 1 1 y , and, in loving women to perpetuate life, they love that which 
In everlasting. 

Lmt a tit 1 1 he Myth of Poms andPenia 

We niiisi consider one final myth found in the Symposium, one that 
run kilns profound significance in cryptic form. This is a special 
version of i he origin of the god Eros* When Aphrodite was born, the 
Hods held a banquet in the garden of Zeus. Poros, who participated, 
lin ?June drunk and sleepy. Penia, who had come to beg and was kept 
ill the threshold of the garden, took advantage of his condition and 
made Porosi npnlaie with her, plotting lo have a son by him. The son 
was It<»s. '' Various interpretations of this myth have been put 
loiwaid The most vveie.hlv view, whieli is strengthened by the 



58 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



59 



context of the whole passage, is that Poros expresses fullness and 
therefore, from a metaphysical standpoint, being, whereas Penia 
represents poverty, privation (of being), the steresis that plays so great 
a part in Greek philosophy and is linked essentially to the concept of 
"matter/' ule (cf. chapter 4). In an atmosphere similar to that of 
Aphrodite's birth— that is, under the sign of that goddess — being is 
united to non being in a moment of blind intoxication; and this 
irrational union (Poros > drunk, has here fallen below his real nature 
as a son of Metis, who represents wisdom) characterizes its own 
product, the love and desire personified by Eros, 

From this point of view, Eros has in other respects, too, that inter- 
mediate, ambivalent nature of which we spoke. He is at once both 
rich and poor because of his double (maternal and paternal) heritage. 
Besides being a "fearful enchanter" and a "troublesome hunter/ 5 he 
bears in his bosom the poverty, the non being proper to Penia, and 
never attains possession (his gain "from time to time, imperceptibly, 
escapes him"). 

Although mortal on one side, he is immortal because of his pater- 
nal heritage; therefore, he dies and is extinguished only to awaken 
again, endlessly. In other words, he is a thirst for which every satis- 
faction is momentary and illusory. Such is the nature of love, of Eros 
as the "faithful minister of Aphrodite." 54 

When explained in these terms, and after certain intellectual refer- 
ences in Plato's account have been eliminated, such a myth of the 
origin of Eros is profound. It sheds light on the metaphysical mean- 
ing of the extroverted desire of sex as a substratum of the "circle of 
generation" and shows its fundamental, incurable contradiction. 

This myth can be linked to many others thai refer to the Fall. The 
drunken union of being (Poros) with privation (Penia) is basically the 
same as the mortal love of Narcissus for the reflection of his image in 
the water. Oriental traditions in particular, based on the idea of finite 
existence governed by illusion (Maya), contain the mysterious and 
irrational fact of transcendental imperfection or darkness (equal to 
the drunkenness or swooning of Poros) and of desire or emotion thai 
led being to identify itself with the "other" (the state other than 
being). Therefore, being is subjected to the law of duality and of 
becoming; or rather it generates that law, and desire or thirst 
becomes the root of its existence in time. 55 

Here we may turn once more to the interpretation of Plotimts re- 
garding the twofold birth of Eros. The first of these births is related 
to Aphrodite Urania, who is presented by Plotimts as embodying rite 
female counterpart of the pure male iniclleciual principle, turns or 
the mind. I'Vctuulaied by the mind and everlastingly joined to il, she 
pnid iters eros. This is the original love that is horn between iwti 



persons from their own beauty; it is the mutual desire of man and 
woman in love with each other, each of whom sees himself or herself 
reflected in the other-, for the generation of spiritual beings. 56 As for 
i he second birth of Eros, Plotinus in fact refers to the myth of Poros 
and Penia. The eros produced by that couple is the desire aroused in 
the lower region, being affected by lack of reason and everlasting 
want, and having sprung here below in this world from the union of 
itself with a simple reflection or phantom of the true "good" (as in the 
myth of Narcissus). Plotinus wrote: 

Thus reason joined to the irrational has produced , by a mistaken desire 
and an unfit substance, something imperfect and impotent, something 
needy born of an illusory desire and an intellect conforming to 
it. . . . And it [eros] remains suspended from Psyche [here equivalent to 
Penia] from whom it is born, as her principle, apart from the mixture 
with this logos, which has not stayed within itself but has mixed with this 
indefinite substance [ale or matter]. . . . And so this love is like a gad- 
fly tortured by its own unsatisfied desire: Even after it has obtained 
satisfaction, its want persists; for fullness cannot be brought about by a 
mixture but can only exist in that which has wholeness in itself by virtue 
nl' its own nature. That desire arising from a privation of nature, even 
when unexpectedly it finds a satisfaction > will always desire again, 
because that satisfaction is only an expedient of its own insufficiency, 
whereas a suitable satisfaction would lie only in the nature of logos. 57 

I he ( ireek philosophers saw, as the substance and sense of the genesis 
(creation) of existence enclosed in the everlasting circle of genera- 

I ion , the state of "that which is and is not." a "life mingled with non- 
life"; and nonlife is the nature of love and desire as revealed to us by 
< lie- myth of Poros and Penia. Lovers, inheriting the intoxication that 
overcame Poros when Aphrodite was born, are actually giving them- 
selves to death when they believe they are continuing life by desiring 
iiiul procreating. They think they are overcoming duality, when in 
hii i they are reconfirming it, 58 This is precisely so because desire, 
when it is extroverted craving dependent on "another," as indeed it is 
in most cases, implies want, an inborn and elementary want; and pre- 
cisely when desire deems itself to be satisfied, it confirms that want 
iiml si lengthens the law of dependence, of insufflcency, of impotence 
toward "being" in an absolute sense. It renounces absolute life when 

II necks it outside, spilling and losing itself in woman. This is the 
I Mirtidox of i hirst when considered from a metaphysical point of view; 
nuit'.hit lion does not quench thirst but confirms it by implying that a 
"ves" lias been said toil. It is the everlasting privation of Eros, whom 
pnv.i'Y.toii alwavs escapes. Through his many rebirths, Eros retains 
I In same privation and (he same need. Thus it is an extroverted and 
Universal «m» ihm ilirnsis men into unions in which the dyad is not 




60 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



61 



overcome; the duality man and woman presupposed by the 
situation of craving fatally stamps the result: The act is one that 
brings "another," the offspring, to life. The "other," which in the 
form of a woman has conditioned a moment of intoxicated, 
spasmodic ecstasy and union, will in general be represented as the 
"other" represented by the child, to whom is transmitted, together 
with life, the recurring destiny of death (the mortal immortality of 
Eros), With the child, there will be indeed an enduring, a continuity, 
but only a continuity of the species, of so many separate existences, 
each pursuing "being'' in vain, it will not be the continuity of a 
transeendentally integrated consciousness, which halts the flow. 
Thus it could be said that the son kills the father and the god of the 
earth cheats those who believe that in woman they have found their 
fulfillment and the end of anguish. Animal birth abbreviates and cut 
short eternal birth or rebirth. Heterogeneration (the procreation of 
the other , or the child) takes the place of self-generation — of the 
androgynous integration." 

This can serve us as a further contribution toward the metaphysics 
of what we called the direction of eros toward its fall. It is also with 
reference to this context that often in the world of tradition, both in 
the Orient and in the ancient West, the divinities of love and fertility 
were at the same time divinities of death. For instance, this inscrip- 
tion to Priapus at a burial place is well known: "I am the god Priapus, 
guardian of the grave with penis gripped tight. This is a place of 
death and life," 

We can indicate here one of the possible interpretations of another 
well-known Hellenic myth, that of Pandora. The chaining of Prome- 
theus (from whom Zeus had once again taken away fire) has as its 
counterpart the gift of Pandora, the woman of desire, the "object of a 
hope that will be disappointed/' given by the gods to Epimetheus, 
the brother of Prometheus. Epimetheus (meaning "he who finds oui 
too late") is actually deemed to be not a separate being but another 
aspect of the Titan, also made of Titanic substance but more slow- 
witted. Here it is as if the gods had found a way to ward off the 
Promethean attempt undertaken in the form that is proper to eros. 
Notwithstanding the warnings of Prometheus, Epimetheus accepts 
the gift of Pandora, allows himself to be bewitched, and enjoys her 
without becoming aware of the deception practiced on him by his 
desire, at which the Olympians laugh. In the box of Pandora (she lias 
been given this name because she seemed to gather the gifts of all flit- 
gods) there remains only misleading hope. The myth says ihui vviih 
Pandora an epoch is ended; for by means of ihe woman of desire, 
death reaches I he world/' 

At I his level, we cud also understood ihe condemnation ul woman 



and sexuality by those who seek to attain everlasting life and the over- 
coming of the human state along the straight road of asceticism. It is 
against such a background and not against that of Platonism that one 
Eros can be opposed to another Eros. At the beginning of chapter 6, 
we shall discuss the "upward flow" and the practice of transmuta- 
tions, but our horizon here is the one sketched out earlier; opposed to 
eros as a positive intoxication^ in a magnetic circuit in which the 
"other" being serves only as food and the dyad has already from the 
onset been resolved, stands the carnal afflicted eros, or thirst and 
craving, a blind impulse for confirmation by means of an illusory 
possession, which miscarries in procreation and animal generation. 

In this respect the decisive point has perhaps been expressed best 
in certain sayings in the apocryphal Gospels having an occult and 
gnostic inspiration. In the Gospel of thS Egyptians we read: "Because 
they say that the Savior declared, 'Come to make an end to the work 
of women, that is, of craving \cupiditas, epulymis], the work of gener- 
al ion and of death/ " This, therefore, is the first possibility; and 
"When our Lord had spoken fittingly of the final conclusion, Salome 
asked, 'Until when shall men die?* and our Lord answered, 'So long 
as ye women shall give birth'; and when she said 'Should I do well, 
then, not to give birth?' our Lord answered and said, 'Eat of every 
plant, but eat not of that which has the bitterness of death/ And 
when Salome asked when the things she wanted to know would be 
made clear to her, our Lord said, 'When the cloak of shame shall be 
1 1 odden under foot and the two shall become one and man with woman 
shall become neither man nor woman/ " 61 

I'loiinus, therefore, spoke of a love that is an illness of the soul, 
"jnsl as when desire of good brings an ill with it. With this he 
indicated exactly the ambivalence of the phenomenon he was dealing 
wiih. 

The essential reference points for the metaphysics of sex have thus 
been established. To sum up, by referring to the myth of the her- 
maphrodite, we have first shown the metaphysical significance of 
ems as a primordial fact, the state or experience of eros that submits 
lo a tendency toward reintegration and being, toward the nondual 
mate from which we have fallen. We have next introduced it into a 
wider context and placed it beside other forms of transport and 
nciive, disindividualizmg exaltation (mania) that the ancient world 
deemed capable of suspending the human condition in one form or 
nihil her and leading it lo contacts with the supcrsensual. Developing 
I he I'lulonic distinction, however, we have indicated the difference 
between a mania deiei inined from below and one determined from 
Hbove ami ihe resulting hivalem y of the eestalic lac I, Next, we have 




62 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



63 



v/, 



seen in the metaphysics of "survival of the species" and of the 
"instinct for reproduction" an involutive displacement of the 
primary meaning inherent in cros — namely, the wish to be absolute 
and immortal. At this same level, in relation to more excessive 
involutive phases, we have looked briefly at the sexuality of the 
animal world; here, too, metaphysics provided us with the key to 
biology but also to compensations that the common man has created 
for himself in his socialized sexual life. Finally, an adequate 
interpretation of the myth of Poros and Penia has enabled us to 
foreshadow the structure of the force that, with its incurable, 
everlasting want, feeds the unending circle of procreation. 

These data should suffice to orient us in the analysis of various 
aspects and mingled forms of the phenomenology of eros, both 
sacred and profane; this analysis, integrated by an examination of the 
mythology of man and woman and by reference to the techniques of 
sexual magic, will form the subject of the following chapters. 



Appendix 

J? Homosexuality 

Homosexuality is so widespread a practice that it cannot be over- 
looked in a doctrine of sex. Goethe wrote that "it is as old as mankind 
and therefore can be said to be a part of nature although it is contrary 
to nature," If it is "an enigma which appears more mysterious the 
more we attempt to analyze it scientifically" (Ivan Bloch), it also 
forms a complex problem from the point of view of the metaphysics 
of sex as formulated in the foregoing pages - 

We have already mentioned that in his theory of eros Plato often 
referred not only to heterosexual love but also to love for epheboi and 
male paramours. 63 Now let us consider "eros" in those of its exalted 
forms that are linked to the aesthetic factor, according to the Platonic 
sequence already mentioned. We should pass gradually from beauty 
as seen by a given being to rapture that can be aroused by incorporeal 
beauty not linked to any particular person: divine beauty in an 
abstract sense. There is no real problem if the accidental starting 
point is a being of the same sex. The word "uranism," which some 
use to mean homosexuality, springs from Plato's distinction between 
Aphrodite Urania and Aphrodite Pandemia; Aphrodite Urania is the 
goddess of a noble love which is not carnal and unconcerned with 
procreation, as is the love which has woman as its object. It may he 
that pederasty (paidon eros, or love of boys) had in the beginning and 
to a certain degree a noble character when it was honored by aneieni 
wiilcrs and poets and practiced by important personages, ltiit it is 



*. 



now enough to read the last pages of the Symposium and the speech of 
Alcibiades in order to realize how little this eros remained "Platonic" 
in Hellas and how it also led increasingly to carnal developments as 
the ancient customs in Greece and Rome declined. 

If, therefore, we assume homosexuality to conform to these carnal 
conditions or to correspond to ordinary sexual relations between man 
and woman, then we may well describe it as a deviation, not from a 
conventional or ethical point of view, but precisely from the stand- 
point of the metaphysics of sex. 

It is inappropriate to apply, as Plato does, the metaphysical mean- 
ing made evident by the myth of the hermaphrodite to homosexual 
love or to love as practiced between pederasts or lesbians. In fact, in 
the case of such love, it is no longer allowable to speak of the impulse 
of the male or female principle, as present in the primordial being, to 
be reunited. The mythical being of our origin would, in such a case, 
have to be not hermaphroditic but homogeneous and of one sex only, 
either all man (in the case of pederasts) or all woman (in the case of 
lesbians), and the two lovers would seek to unite themselves as 
simple parts of one and the same substance. Thus the essential, 
which gives each myth its whole value, loses its meaning, namely, the 
idea of the polarity and the complementary nature of the two sexes as 
the basis of the magnetism of love and of a "transcendency" in eros, 
and of the blinding and destructive revelation of the One. 

To find an explanation it is necessary to descend to a lower level 
and examine various empirical possibilities. Normally two forms of 
homosexuality are distinguished in sexology: One has an inborn, 
natural character, whereas the other has an acquired character and is 
conditioned by psychological and sociological factors influenced by a 
person's environment. But in the second of these forms it is necessary 
to give a proper value to the distinction between forms having a 
vicious nature and forms that presuppose a latent predisposition 
which is aroused under given circumstances. It is necessary to set 
forth this condition because, given the same situation, different types 
behave in different ways and may not become homosexual. It is 
important, however, not to consider the inborn form of 
homosexuality in a rigid way but to allow a certain possibility of 
variation. 

In natural homosexuality or in the predisposition to it, the most 
straightforward explanation is provided by what we said earlier about 
t he differing levels of sexual development and about the fact that the 
process of sexual development in its physical and, even more so, in its 
psychic aspects can be incomplete. In that way, the original bisexual 
nuiiiiv is surpassed to a lesser extent than in a "normal" human 
beiii]',, the characteristics <il' one sex not being predominant over 



64 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



65 



those of the other sex to the same extent (see chapter 1). Next we 
must deal with what M. Hirschfeld called the "intermediate sexual 
forms. 5 * In cases of this kind (for instance, when a person who is 
nominally a man is only 60 percent male), it is impossible that the 
erotic attraction based on the polarity of the sexes in 
heterosexual ity — which is much stronger the more the man is male 
and the woman is female — can also be born between individuals who, 
according to the birth registry and as regards only the so-called 
primary sexual characteristics, belong to the same sex, because in 
actual fact they are "intermediate forms." In the case of pederasts, 
Ulrichs said rightly that it is possible to find "the soul of a woman 
born in the body of a man." 

But it is necessary to take into account the possibility of constitu- 
tional mutations, a possibility that has been given little consideration 
by sexologists; that is, we must also bear in mind cases of regression. 
It may be that the governing power on which the sexual nature of a 
given individual depends (a nature that is truly male or truly female) 
may grow weak through neutralization, atrophy, or reduction of the 
latent state of the characteristics of the other sex, and this may lead to 
the activation and emergence of these recessive characteristics. 
And here the surroundings and the general atmosphere of society can 
play a not unimportant part. In a civilization where equality is the 
standard, where differences are not linked, where promiscuity is in 
favor, where the ancient idea of "being true to oneself means 
nothing anymore — in such a splintered and materialistic society, it is 
clear lhat this phenomenon of regression and homosexuality should 
be particularly welcome, and therefore it is in no way a surprise to see 
the alarming increase in homosexuality and the "third sex" in the 
latest "democratic" period, or an increase in sex changes to an extent 
unparalleled in other eras. 65 

But the reference to "intermediate sexual forms," to an incomplete 
process of the development of sex or to a regression, does not explain 
all the varieties of homosexuality. In fact, there have been male 
homosexuals who have nor been effeminate or "intermediate forms" 
but even men of war, individuals decidely manly in their appearanee 
and behavior, powerful men who have had or could have had the 
most beautiful women at their disposal. Such homosexuality is hard 
to explain, and we have the right here to speak of deviation and 
perversion, of "vice" linked, perhaps, to a fashion. Indeed, it is hard 
to understand what can drive a man who is truly a man sexually 
toward an individual of the same sex. If appropriate material for the 
realization of the zenith of the orgasm of heterosexual love is a linos I 
nonexistent, this is even more the case in t lie embraces of homosexual 
love. However, i here is reason I o suppose thai it is merely a mat I er of 



"mutual masturbation" and that the conditioned reflexes are 
exploited for "pleasure" since not only the metaphysical but also the 
physical premises for a whole and destructive union are lacking. 

On the other hand, classical antiquity bears witness not so much to 
a homosexuality having sole rights and being the foe of women and 
wedlock, but rather to a bisexual attitude in which both women and 
young men were used (as a counterpart, there are generally many 
cases of very highly sexed and also very feminine women who are at 
the same time lesbians , with bisexual practices). Here it seems that 
the governing motivation was simply the desire to try everything. 
However, not even this point is very clear because, apart from the 
fact that there was femininity in the epheboi and youths who were the 
favourite object of those pederasts, we may also refer to the crude 
saying, taken by Goethe from a Greek writer, that if one has had 
enough from a girl as a girl, she can always play the part of a boy 
CHabe ich ah Madchen sie salt, dient es ah Knabe noch"). 

As to the claim for an ideal nature of hermaphroditic wholeness in 
the pederast who acts both as man and as woman sexually, that is 
obvious fallacious beyond the level of straightforward sensations; 
hermaphroditic wholeness can only be "sufficiency," for it has no 
need of another being and is to be sought at the level of a spiritual 
realization that excludes the nuances that the "magic of the two" can 
offer in heterosexual unions. 

Even the rationale sometimes found in countries such as Turkey 
and lapan, that homosexual possession gives a feeling of power, is 
not convincing. The pleasure of domination can also be felt with 
women and with other beings in situations free of sexual intercourse. 
Besides, such a pleasure could be involved only in a completely 
pathological context where it would develop into a true orgasm. 

Thus overall, when homosexuality is not "natural" or else cannot 
be explained in terms of incomplete inborn forms of sexual develop- 
ment, it must have the character of a deviation, a vice, or a perver- 
sion. And if some insrances of extreme erotic intensity in relations 
between homosexuals should be adduced, the explanation is to be 
sought in the possibility of the displacement of eros. Indeed, it is 
enough to go through any treatise on sexual psychopathology to see 
in how- many unthinkable situations the erotic potential of a human 
being can be aroused, sometimes to the level of orgiastic frenzy (from 
fetishism even to animal sodomy and necrophilia). The same 
anomalous background could include the case of homosexuality, 
although the latter is much more frequent: a displaced eros for which 
a being of the same sex can serve as a simple, occasional cause or 
support* us in so many cases of psychopathy, although it must wholly 
lack every profound dimension and every meaning higher than 



t 



66 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



experience because of the absence of the necessary ontological and 
metaphysical premises. As we shall see in certain aspects of sadism 
and masochism, it is possible to find elements that can be included in 
the deepest structures of heterosexual erotics and that become 
perversions only when freed from limitations. No similar recognition 
can be given in respect to homosexuality. 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



Sex and Human Values 

The characteristic of truly intense love in its hidden metaphysical 
i basis is its "transcendency": transcendency in respect of the 
1 individual being; in respect of his values, his standards, his ordinary 
interests, his most intimate ties, and, in an extreme case, his well- 
being, his peace, his happiness, and his actual physical life. 

The absolute unconditional can only lie beyond the life of an ego 
enclosed within the limits of the empirical, physical, practical, 
moral, or intellectual person. Thus, as a principle, only that which 
goes beyond such a life and such an ego, which creates a crisis, 
induces a stronger force, and displaces the center outside of itself 
(this, too, may happen, if necessary , in a problematical, catastrophic, 
or destructive way) — only that can, perhaps, open the way to a higher 
region. 

Now, it is a fact that in ordinary life, in few situations other than 
those conditioned by love and sex, this condition of transcendency is 
rarely attained. It would indeed be a waste of time to emphasize what 
love, the everlasting and inexhaustible subject of art and literature, 
has been able to do in the history of mankind and in individual and 
collective life. It has propitiated eminence and heroism as well as 
baseness, unworthiness, misconduct, and betrayal. If one were truly 
to see in sexual love an impulse linked genetically to animal nature, 
then one could draw the conclusion that man stands at a level much 
lower than any other species, for he has allowed love, sex, and woman 
to intoxicate and govern not only his physical being but, even more 
so, the realm of his highest faculties to such a degree that they have 
extended the area of their encroachment far beyond trivial instinct. 
If, instead, we follow the metaphysical interpretation of sex, all these 1 -)£ 
facts can be seen and evaluated differently. The tyranny of love and 
sex that in eros is able to overthrow, undermine, or subordinate 
everything else, becomes, instead of an extreme degradation and 
ineradicable devilry in human existence, the sign of man's 
irrepressible nature and of his urge to move beyond the limits of his j 
Unite individuality. 

Biology has pui ihe functions of feeding and reproduction on the 
same level (sometimes considering I he first as primary, since people 



68 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



cannot live without food), yet the absolute difference in status 
between the two functions seems obvious. Only in extreme cases of 
absolute hunger can the nutritive function overthrow the individual. 
But that function is destitute of any psychic counterpart; throughout 
history under normal social conditions* nothing in regard to food 
corresponds to the part that the sexual function plays in individual or 
collective life* or to the profound and manifold influence exerted by 
that function at the emotional, moral, intellectual, and, not seldom, 
even the spiritual level. Man has no other need that reaches the 
depths of being in the same measure as the erotic -sexual need; none 
attains the status of a "complex" that develops its influence before, 
after, and even outside of that satisfaction. 

It would be banal to dwell on the social aspects of the "transcen- 
dental" power of love. It can violate the boundaries of caste and tradi- 
tion, make persons of the same blood or persuasion enemies, separate 
sons from fathers, and break the links established by the most holy 
institutions. History has shown us this in the house of the Hapsburgs 
and in that of England. The story of Shakespeare's Ferdinand, who, 
through his love of Miranda, declared himself ready to give up his 
rank of king and be content to be the slave of Prospero, is a theme re- 
stricted to literature or to the romantic princes of operettas* The in- 
centive for the creation of the Anglican church against Rome lay in 
the sexual problem of Henry VIII. A part that cannot be overlooked 
was played in the genesis of the Reformation by the sexuality of 
Luther, who could not bear monastic discipline. Confucius 
remarked that there was never done as much for justice as there was 
for a woman's smile; Leopardi in his // Prima Amore (First Love) 
acknowledged in eros the power to arouse a sense of the vanity of 
every design or study, the very love of glory and every other pleasure. 
The classical myth makes Paris, under the sign of Aphrodite, prefer 
the most beautiful woman to the highest learning promised by 
Athena-Minerva and to the empire of Asia and the riches promised 
by Hera- Juno. "I have greater joy in one look or word from you, 
young lady," says Goethe's Faust, "than in universal knowledge." 
From ancient times there resounds the disconcerting questions of 
'Mimnermus — whether in general there is life or enjoyment of life 
without "golden Aphrodite" and whether life without her is still life. l 
Sexology agrees in acknowledging that love, "as unleashed passion, 
is like a volcano that burns and consumes everything; it is an abyss 
that swallows down honor, fortune and health." 2 

In a properly psychological field, some favorable effects of love can 
be noted, Plato remarked that in the case of unworthy behavior or 
base action., no man would ever be so ashamed ol hinisell as when his 
lover was present; "No one is so base ihal Inve it sell eannol inspire 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



69 



him with divine bravery and make him the equal of a man who is very 
bold by nature. . . . Precisely that hardihood which is inspired in 
some heroes by the god is bestowed by Love on lovers because of her 
own nature." 3 To all of this can be linked the part, which is even 
exaggerated by romantic literature, that love and woman have played 
in driving men to high deeds and sublime actions. If "There is 
nothing I would not do for you" is a trivial commonplace in the 
language of lovers, it echoes the ideals of medieval chivalry according 
to which a man would willingly risk his life for a woman in fighting or 
in dangerous undertakings and would make her the inspiration for all 
his glory and honor. Here we must distinguish between that which is 
done simply to obtain possession of the woman one loves and all that 
which, in regard to favorable disposition, self-conquest , and creative 
enthusiasm, has had woman and erotic experience as mere 
propitiatory means; of these two cases, only the second should really 
be taken into account. 4 

But as signs of the power that shatters the individual, the negative 
effects of passion are more interesting: the aspects of a transcendency 
that does not spare the moral personality and undermines its most 
essential values. Once more we can refer to Plato, who notes how- 
lovers "agree to a servitude that not even a slave would undergo" and 
do not deem themselves worthless because of a flattery such that not 
even the most degraded tyrant would wish for it. "If someone, to 
enrich himself or make his way in the world, should wish to behave as 
he does for love - , . a friend, even an enemy, would prevent him 
from sinking so low." 5 In the ethics of the Aryan people, no other 
virtue was honored so much as the truth and nothing inspired so 
much horror as a lie. In Indo- Aryan morals, a lie was allowed only for 
the purpose of saving a human life or in love. Along with self-respect, 
we can include the criterion of fairness — "All is fair in love and war/* 
A very oath ceases to be sacred — "He who loves is the only person 
who can swear and be forsworn without incurring the wrath of the 
gods," says Plato; 6 and Ovid, to support him, says: "Jove in the 
highest heavens makes a game of lovers who are forsworn, and he 
desires the breeze and the wind to carry them away without any 
effect," "Virtue . . , which has become deception and breaks its 
faith with them [women] does not deserve the name of dishonor." 7 

The moral to be drawn is that because something absolute is to be 
expected from love, it preempts even virtue itself. Its ultimate goal is 
beyond good and evil. If the ultimate meaning of man's drive toward 
woman is what we said earlier, namely the need to "be" in the tran~ 
scciuleiii sense, what we have just revealed and what is confirmed by 
everyday life appears perfeclly comprehensible. And il also seems to 
make sense ihui in exlrcntc cases of 1 he element ury force of eros, ihe 



70 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



individual may be driven to suicide, homicide, or madness if he can- 
not satisfy his desire. The illusion that profane love offers in reflect- 
ing .what eros can give where it passes to a higher plane (the total 
happiness of union) is such that, if it is denied or interrupted, life it- 
self loses every attraction and becomes empty and void of sense, so 
that it can lead to suicide. For this very reason, the loss of a loved one 
owing to death or treachery can be an agony that surpasses all other 
agonies. Schopenhauer expresses this better than anyone else. 8 But 
though his observation of a motive and value that go absolutely 
beyond the individual in love is accurate, his references to the omni- 
potence of the species and his failure to see anything except the tragic 
effect of an illusion are absurd. The positive contribution of 
Schopenhauer was his indication that the sufferings of a betrayed 
love surpass all other sufferings, not because of an empirical and 
psychological element but because of the transcendental element, the 
fact that not the finite but the essential and eternal individual is 
struck. This, however, is a question not of the species in man but of 
his deepest nucleus in the absolute need to "be," to be confirmed, 
this need being aroused through eros and the magic of woman. 

In this same order of ideas, we find interesting cases where sexual 
love persists despite disparity of character and intellectual inclina- 
tions and is reaffirmed even when scorn and hate are felt by the indi- 
vidual. Situations actually exist that fit the strange definition of love 
given by one of Bourgef s characters: "This is love, a deady hatred 
between two copulations." 9 The hate element in love requires a 
separate study because it may have a deeper meaning, not existential 
but metaphysical, as we shall see in the next chapter. On the other 
hand, it may be considered and integrated in the wholeness of 
transcendency, in relation to the three possible levels of the occ- 
urrence of eros in a human being. It takes place mainly when the 
force of the elementary layer is reaffirmed as stronger than the con- 
ditional characteristics of both the individual's values and the 
individual considered at the level of his preformation, his own 
nature, and his character. The desire is absolute, against which even 
hatrcd_and contempt toward the loved one have no power. It is 
precisely these examples that count as a "litmus test" since they tell 
us what is truly fundamental in eros even in cases where there are no 
contrasts or appreciable human heterogeneity between the lovers 
and, therefore, the elementary magnetism may be awakened in a 
climate free from tensions, 

"Everlasting Love ," Jealousy, and Sexual Pride 

The positive counterpart thai is present even in problematic cases is 
the feeling thai in woman there is life, that she is life ilseli T life in ;i 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



71 



higher sense. The banal language of lovers contains the recurring 
theme "You are my life," "I cannot live without you," and so on in 
unending, manifold varieties. Trivial, no doubt; but the plane on 
which we shall see this theme reappear and be integrated in a cycle of 
myths and sagas that encompasses traditions far distant in time and 
space is far from trivial. Thus, the feeling of a higher life is foretasted ,,, 
and reflected if only for a moment through woman in confused, ' 
emotional states and is also echoed in the stereotypical expressions of 
the universal language of lovers. 

It is therefore natural that love should be linked both to anguish 
and to a need to make oneself eternaL It is anguish lest one should fall 
from such heights. And so in every love there is alw T ays fear, even in 
the most intense moments. Indeed, more than ever is a lover afraid 
that everything may end; for this reason, he expresses his wish to die 
and ask continuously, anxiously, and untiringly through fear of 
change, "Will you love me forever?" "Will you ever tire of me?" 
"Will you always want me?" There is no love so secure that it does not 
need an "always," an endless duration. The sentiment governs us for 
a moment even though reason is perfectly aware of its absurd and 
illusory nature, and even though the same sentiment is rekindled 
again and again, in subsequent erotic relationships, A typical case is 
the passions of Shelley. The sentiment represents an essential 
moment in the gathering of experience. 10 When this feeling is 
present, there is also a correlative in transcending the temporary 
element and going beyond the limit of the present; there is a feeling of 
familiarity frequent among lovers, of having known each other for a 
very long time: "You are the image that I always carried hidden 
within me," or "It seems to me thai I knew you before I knew myself. 
You seem to me to have been before everything that I am" 
(Melandro, in Maeterlinck). These are all real facts of erotic 
experience. They would be completely absurd if love's sole reason for 
existing was procreative coitus; for it would have no need for 
possession beyond the stage linked to the momentary acl of simple 
union; but such facts show a precise logic of their own in light of the 
metaphysics of sex. 

The same can be said for faithfulness and jealousy. Neither is 
required by nature or by the species. Indeed, the opposite would be 
natural, for attachment to one being could only have a restricting 
effect on freedom of procreativity when other partners would offer 
l he same, or belter, biological capabilities for reproduction. Instead, 
we should understand that, when a beloved woman sets at rest the 
need for self confirmation and for "beings" the existential privation 
ol " ilit* ereainre is removed and he feels he possesses Tale in himself. 
The notion dial his beloved mijv betray tiim or pass on In others 



72 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



73 



makes him feel utterly broken and harms the deepest existential 
nucleus within him; and the stronger the erotic magnetism, the more 
weight such an idea will have. It can be understood, then, how love 
changes into hate, how the feeling of his own destruction could drive 
man savagely to destroy and even kill the person who has betrayed 
him; this would be nonsense in the context of mere survival of the 
species or the field of psychology. With a love-hate that slays, neither 
the individual nor the species gains anything. 

There arc cases in which love's need to possess another being 
wholly, physically and morally, in the flesh and in the soul, can be 
explained in its most superficial aspect by the pride of the ego and the 
impulse toward power* We say "its most superficial aspect" because 
these impulses are not primary but rather complex ones formed at the 
level of the social individual, whose root is more deep and hidden. 
The GehungFtrieb, the need to have worth, the need to enhance one's 
value in one's own eyes even more than in the eyes of other people, 
the "manly protest" that Adler set as a central theme in his analytical 
psychology, are not so much the causes of neurotic 
overcompensation as the effects of an inferiority complex. This 
complex is transcendental in nature, stemming from an 
understanding of man's inborn privation as a finite being, shattered 
and problematical, a mixture of being and nonbeing. Eros is one of 
the natural forms with which man seeks to reduce and suspend this 
feeling of privation* It is logical that some people strive for self- 
confirmation and a sense of self- worth through erotic and sex- 
ual possession; it gives them the illusion of "being" — and the 
phenomenology of both jealousy and sexual tyranny arises from it. 
But, let us repeat, none of this has a primary character; it only 
concerns transpositions belonging to the sphere of the most 
peripheral consciousness. A man who limits himself to this level does 
not understand the ultimate sense and the depth dimension of the 
impulses that he obeys in these cases; thus, he often nourishes the 
deflected and distorted compensatory manifestations we have just 
mentioned. That quite ridiculous thing called the "pride of the male" 
is of this sphere. Even more external is that which, in the occurrence 
of jealousy, may be governed by simple love of oneself and by the 
social idea of love. We speak of deflected transpositions because, 
when the ego seeks in the feeling of possession and in sexual egoism a 
compensation or anesthetic for its own dim feeling of inferiority, and 
when the feeling of possession provides a substitute for "being,' 1 the 
actual effect is almost always a reinforcement of egosim of the 
empirical individual in his limited and closed state; and this goes 
againsi (he lendcncy inward sclf-transccndenco, which is the highesi 
capabiliiy til cms. However* this silualion is ofien lo be found. In 



* 



D'Annunzio*s Trionfo delta morie (Triumph of Death), Giorgio 
Aurispa clings desperately to the feeling of possession in order to 
escape his feeling of nothingness and to fight against the irresistible 
urge toward suicide. And he says, "On earth there is only one lasting 
intoxication: absolute certainty in the possession of another creature. 
I am seeking this intoxication." 

But m erotic experiences today we mainly find a mixture of these 
two contradictory moments: the impulse to have worth by 
possessing, and the tendency to abandon oneself during union. This 
contradiction has in a certain way a dialectical character, and from a 
metaphysical point of view the two tendencies are connected 
genetically and both proceed from one and the same root, being 
opposed to each other only in their finite, conditioned forms of 
manifestation/' 1 Instead, in a integrated eros, the character proper 
to mania (frenzy) or to exaltation and enthusiasm will prevail under 
1 the sign of the One, and therefore there will be a movement beyond 
\ self and other, beyond affirmation of self and other, similar to what 
happens in heroic experience on a different plane. And the antithesis 
we mentioned just now is overcome. "Beyond life," "more than life/' 
may be the principle suitable for great love, for grand passion and 
great desire: "I love you more than my life." The technique of an 
Arab love spell consists in the man's concentrating all his will in the 
expression of his eyes and in staring at the woman, while making 
three cuts in his left arm, and then pronouncing the phrase "There is 
no god but God. And just as this is true, so will all my blood flow out 
before my thirst to possess you is quenched." 12 

Phenomena of Transcendency in Puberty 

Of special interest are the conditions that often accompany the first 
signs of the force of sex in puberty and in love. 

At the stage when the state caused by the polarity of the sexes is the 
subject of experiments for the first time, a kind of dismay or fear or 
anguish is almost always felt because there is the more or less distinct 
sensation of the action of a new, higher, boundless force within the 
psychic and physical framework of the individual. It is a fear stem- 
ming from a foreboding of the crisis that the individual will undergo 
and of the danger he will run, this fear being mingled with lack of 
knowledge of desire. The expression used by Dante for the feeling 
roused in him by the first appearance of woman 13 delineates this 
point: licce Dcusfortiorme, qui venietis dommabitur miki (Behold God, 
stronger than I, who comes and will hold sway over me): a stronger 
force thai makes I he ''natural spirit" (to whom the naturalistic 
individual itisiv be made lo correspond) say: lieu miser/ Quia 
litt{nintiT inijutlttits rn> ttt-ttnt'f>s. f (Al;is, wretched am 1! lor 1 shall 



74 The Metaphysics of Sex 

often be in difficulty hereafter!) And Jelaluddin Rumi: 

Death rightly sets a terra to the anguish of life. 
And yet life trembles before death. . . . 
Just as a heart trembles in the face of love, 
as if it felt the threat of its end. 
For there where love is roused, 
the ego, the obscure tyrant, dies. I4 

When examined in a proper light., the pathology of the phenomena of 
puberty is, in this respect, especially indicative. The appearance of 
the force of sex produces an upset that (if hereditary deficiencies, in- 
nate weakness of the organism* psychic trauma, or other causes pre- 
vent the individual from overcoming the crisis) provokes unhealthy 
symptoms, which may even lead to madness itself, a specific form of 
mental derangement that Kahlbaum called hebephrenia or the 
madness of puberty. 15 These symptoms can be interpreted as one of 
two malfunctions. Either too little energy has been introduced into 
the "circuits" in which the elementary, superindividual force ol eros, 
transformed and reduced, gives way to the ordinary forms of indi- 
vidual sexuality, or else there is a structural fault in those circuits and 
the adjustment of the psychic and physical framework to the energy 
does not take place or does so only partially. Hysterical and epileptic 
or semicataleptic fits, forms of melancholia and depression 
alternating with forms of exaltation, attacks of masturbatory 
derangement and the like are all possible effects of the action of the 
new unchanneled or deviated force. Mairet states that in frenetic 
attacks of masturbation, as also in other acts, the individual so 
afflicted feels he is transported by an inner force independent of his 
own will, just as if he were possessed. The same interpretation may 
perhaps be applied during the crisis of puberty to a halt in intellectual 
development; it is here a pathological neutralization or inhibition of 
the mind. But in iesser degrees it is a normal phenomenon also in 
falling in love and in passion* The same meaning should be attached 
to frequent hallucinations of sight or hearing in adolescence; they are 
due to a power that can disconnect the imaginative and perceptive 
faculty from the bonds of the senses. This has a counterpart in that 
magical arousal of the imagination through eros which we mentioned 
earlier. Last, besides conditions of energy depletion or tedium vitae 
(boredom with life), we. should examine the suicidal urges that 
appear sometimes during puberty; here the effect is obviously one of 
a "passive" experience of the impulse toward transcendence, an 
anticipation of the sexuality-death complex, with which we shall 
soon deal al some length. In I his field, loo, pathology enlarges 
phvxinlnj'.v. All these possible "upsets" thai take place in I he crisis of 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



75 



puberty are repeated on a-smaller scale every time one falls in love £ 
and, above all, in the first experience of love, 

Marro 18 cites the clinical evidence of a youth afflicted with such 
troubles who said that "he felt a fluid going from his bowels up his 
back and reaching to his brain"; 19 he was then struck by an 
irresistible urge to perform some violent, convulsive actions* This 
case gives an idea of the valuable material the psychiatrists could 
gather if they had adequate knowledge of the hyperphysical 
physiology of the human being; for it is easy to see that this testimony 
relates to an experience of a partial awakening of the kundalini or 
fundamental power latent within ordinary sexuality, which the 
teachings of yoga treat; such an awakening, it is said, may even have 
madness or death as its outcome whenever it is provoked without 
adequate training. 20 In its normal and nonpathoiogical forms, which 
correspond to a partial channeling of energy in the individual circuits 
of transformation, we shall find, instead, the more or less stormy 
arousal of the emotional faculties during puberty. - 

In the period of puberty, we should also consider manifestations 
that, though not pathological, have the same genetic origin on the 
spiritual plane. These manifestations directly reveal the superphysi- 
cal aspect of the new force in action when free and not wholly polar- 
ized and specialized in the ordinary sexual sense . We refer to cases of y 
a strong arousal of religious feeling and mystic tendencies during 
puberty. Psychologists have often noted that spiritual crises and con- 
versions are mainly brought about during this period and accompany 
states that are often akin to the pathology of puberty: a sense of 
incompleteness and imperfection, anguish, unhealthy introspection, 
anxiety, disgust, insecurity, vague and inward dissatisfaction — all of 
these to such a degree that Starbuch could write that theology takes 
the tendencies of youth and builds upon them. 22 An analogy exists 
between the modification of feelings about the world and life that 
characterizes a favorable solution to a religious crisis, and the 
modification that is linked to the enthusiasm of a first happy love. 
William James wrote regarding the religious phenomenon that an 
appearance of newness embellishes every object, as opposed to the 
previous feeling of the unreality and alien nature of the world: a 
willingness to be, even when everything remains the same/ 5 But in 
the same way Stendhal wrote with regard to love: "Love-passion 
casts before the eyes of a man the whole of nature in its most sublime 
aspects, just like something new invented yesterday. Man is amazed 
thai he has never seen the curious sight which is now revealed to his 
soul. Ewcrylfaing is new; everything is alive and inspiring.* 
"NY/win we eiu iungtf Umhl'mg > sl </'<'*' Wdt* (Beautiful as a youthful 
spring mu* is I his world), says a well known soup, referring lo a first 



^ 



76 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



77 



happy love. "You shall see by falling in love" {?ashiq tarn) is a Arabic 
saying that is said to have caused the enlightenment of a Sufi. These 
are reflections of the state of wholeness and of the metaphysical 
integration of the ego, caused by eros. The natural counterpart is the 
feeling of emptiness, of lack of spirit, of Indifference toward 
everything when love has been disappointed or ended abruptly. Even 
the frequency of ecstasy during the age of puberty has been noted. 25 

The same situation is met on a deeper plane than that of simple 
psychology in the field of ethnology. In many primitive peoples the 
so-called sacred or initiatory diseases, which are deemed signs of 
being chosen, normally coincide with the arrival of sexual maturity. 
It has been rightly noted that the training of a shaman or wizard or 
priest, which follows that sign of being chosen, has nothing to do 
with the pathological condition, 26 It docs not represent a systematic 
cultivation of that pathological state. On the contrary, in such a 
training process, a technique is used to remove everything having the 
nature of illness; the new force is fixed in the state arising on a 
spiritual plane, and therefore the symptoms of the pathology of 
adolescence die away automatically. The outcome is not a normal 
condition but something more, a capacity for real and active contact 
with the supersensual. In this ethnological context, there are also 
interesting cases of an initiation process in which youths who have 
reached puberty are selected before they have touched a woman; 27 
the object here is to gather and fix the force of transcendent virility 
before it becomes specialized or sexually polarized in a strict sense. 

This leads us to the so-called rites of passage that refer also to sex in 

an inward, spiritual sense as opposed to merely a physical one. In 

various cultures, special rites accompany the change from childhood 

a to puberty, thus giving it the significance of a passage from a 

naturalistic level to manhood in a higher sense. Two most important 

r points must be emphasized here. 

First of all, something like death or rebirth is celebrated in these 
rites. Thus, one who has undergone them will sometimes be given a 
new name and lose the memory of his previous life or will use a new 
secret language and enter into communication with the mystic forces 
of his ancestral stock. The phenomenon of transcendency, therefore, 
acquires a precise physiognomy, being guided in this case by a con- 
scious technique with institutional and traditional backgrounds. 

Second, we can perceive cases of the differentiation between a 
spiritual virility and a virility that is only physical in that only he who 
has been through this rite is deemed to be truly a man and to have 
been "made a man," Being removed from his mother's supervision, 
he becomes pari of (he "societies of meiu" Id which may correspond 
"houses of men" isolated from oilier dwellings which are societies 



•fa. 



* 



having specific forms of sacred, political, or military authority over 
the rest of the population. Any male who has not undergone the rite, 
whatever his age, is not considered a real man but belongs with the 
women, animals, and babies. To mark the changeover symbolically, 
the candidate for initiation has to put on female clothing beforehand 
to show he has not yet been "made a man." 

Therefore, we can see quite clearly that special techniques are used 
to gather the force of sex in the free state when it is first displayed in 
the individual, and to make that force act to bring about a profound 
change in the being. In the case of the male, the effect is the confirma- 
tion of what we called the inward manhood. 2y It is possible that the 
Roman Catholic rite of Confirmation, which is usually celebrated at 
the advent of puberty, is a last reflection of the traditional practices of 
the past. The first celebration of the Eucharist is linked to that rite. 
This sacrament in theory includes equally the ideas of trans ubstanti- 
ation, death, and resurrection. 

This leads us now to the realm of an eros that is not profane, a 
realm in which sex is made sacred, but according to an undeniable 
continuity. In fact, the basic meanings remain the same. Here is con- 
firmation of the transcendency of eros; for, being at the basis of the 
pathology of adolescence, eros, when its love is aroused within the <•/•- 
closed circuits of the individual, characterizes the passion that 6* 
overthrows and consumes, in a favorable or unfavorable sense, and /•'- 
takes man outside himself in a passive sense, as object rather than^y 
subject of the surpassing of the limit of the ego in ordinary lovers. 
The facts mentioned regarding ethnology and other facts of the 
traditional world, which we shall deal with, bear witness to the 
possibility of a conscious and active use of this potential 
transcendency for the purposes of special consecrations and, above 
all, for the realization of the nonnaturalistie aspect of the virile 
quality. 

Love, the Hearty Dreams, and Death 

The part played by the heart in the language of lovers is very well 
known and belongs mainly to the sphere of the most saccharine senti- 
mentality. Nevertheless, even here, one may see a reflection of a pro- 
found fact, if one remembers what the heart has always signified in 
esoteric and learned traditions. More than the scat of simple 
emotions, these traditions considered the heart as the center of the 
human being 10 but also the seat to which consciousness is transferred 
during sleep, abandoning the scat in the head, which corresponds 
normally in 1 he stale of wakefulness.*' The "conscious" equivalent of 
l he eondilion of sleep is, however* as we said before, l he subtle state. 
Especially in Hindu hill also in 111:111 v oilier nivslic traditions, the 



? 



78 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



79 



inner, secret space of the heart is believed to be the seat of 
supersensual light ("light of the heart")- We have something more 
than the mere trivial and vague allusion typical of the language of 
lovers, something much more precise, when Dante, in talking about 
the first, sudden perception of eros, speaks of the "very secret 
chamber of the heart." Nothing is more fatuous than the heart 
struck by an arrow (the arrow and the torch were attributed by the 
ancients to Eros); it is a subject preferred even for the tattoos of 
sailors and criminals. But at the same time, it is like a hieroglyph that 
has an unusual power. In its most typical forms ? eros seems to be a 
kind of trauma at the central point of a being, which from an esoteric 
point of view is the heart. According to similar traditions, the bond of 
the individual ego is established in the heart. It must be broken to 
, reach a higher freedom. Here eros acts like the deadly wound of an 
arrow. We shall see that the "Worshippers of Love" in the Middle 
Ages and, with them, Dante, understood this context consciously on 
a level beyond the profane experience of lovers. But even in mundane 
experience, in every love, the trace remains. The xetmfafhu-l-qalb 
(the opening or disclosure of the heart) belongs to Islamic esotericism 
and, with the term "light of the heart," is often found in the language 
of the mystics. In the Corpus Hermeticum (VII, II; VI, I) we meet 
the expression "to open the eyes of the heart" or "to understand with 
the eyes of the heart." Now. it is possible to establish a relationship 
between this condition (which to a certain extent means a 
disindividualizing, a slackening of the bond of the heart) and the 
experience of newness (an almost fresh, active transformation of the 
: world that accompanies the state of love); we can foresee a shadow of 
what the mystical language of the Suits calls the world seen with the 
^ayn el-qalb, the eye of the heart. 

In the first chapter we said that erotic experience implies a dis- 
placement of the level of the ordinary, waking consciousness in the 
individual. This is a tendential transfer, by exaltation, toward the 
seat of the heart. Indeed, the condition of "exaltation" in eros, accom- 
panied by an unusual degree of inner activity, results in the beginning of 
this displacement. Consciousness is retained and participates, there- 
fore, in a certain "dreaming" enlightenment and transformation into 
a lucid state instead of the normal trance or sleep. Apart from the re- 
percussions already mentioned, on perception of the outside world, 
this displacement is also linked to a certain aura that lights up the 
physiognomy of some lovers, even when their appearance usually 
lacks any nobility. 

But if we examine the relationship of this displacement with the 
one thai commonly occlusal night, we are led to another point that is 
itself indicative. In fact, the link between love and W\y]\\ lime is more 



than a well-known theme of romantic poetry. It also has an existential 
substratum that is revealed in various ways. Even nowadays the night 
is deemed the most suitable time for sexual love. Throughout the 
whole world it is at night, above all, that men and women unite. Here 
the presence of a hyperphysical factor contradicts the findings of 
biology; for the best physiological conditions for "healthy and 
normal" love with the greatest reserves of fresh energy should exist 
precisely in the morning. We cannot counter with incidental 
circumstances belonging to our environment or way of life such as 
the fact that for most people there is less free time during the day; for 
the preference for night is confirmed as a habit even where social 
conditions and social status do not seem to prescribe such a 
preference. Indeed, among certain peoples the use of the night for 
sexual union is ritually and severely prescribed, sometimes in 
general, whereas at other times the practice is limited to a longer or 
shorter initial period of sexual relations. At dawn the man must leave 
the woman. Tantrism specifically prescribes "the heart of the night" 
for magical and initiatory practices with a woman, and in the Fang- 
pi-shu, the secret Chinese art of the bed, there are references to the 
night, which is called the time of the "living breath." It is also at night 
that certain orgiastic rites are practiced such as those of the Khlysti, 
to which we shall return later. Similarly, in the Eleusinian mysteries, 
the rite of sacred copulation, hieros gamos, was celebrated at night 
in an unlit place. This rite, known as Nyctelia, was not merely 
symbolic; it was a part of the orgiastic rite of Dionysus, and women 
officiated at it. In Sparta, a man could take himself a wife acquired by 
rape, undo her belt, and lie with her only by night or in the dark, 3 
And if many women still prefer night, it is not from modesty but 
from subconscious memory. Hathor, the Egyptian goddess of love, 
was also Lady of the Night, and this theme echoes in the verse of 
Baudelaire: li Tn chanties le soiriNymphe tenebreuse et chaudeP (You 
charm the evening, warm and darkling Nymph). 

Here are some acute factors of a cosmic and analogical type: cosmic 
because, as we said, it is at night that the cyclical change of condition 
occurs in everybody, a movement of consciousness to the seat of the 
heart, and therefore, even if one stays awake at night, the movement 
occurs and integrates the tendencies of eros; analogical because love 
slays under the sign of woman, and woman corresponds to the dark, 
underground, nocturnal aspect of being, to the vital unconscious- 
ness, and her realm is therefore the night and darkness. 34 In conclu- 
sion, i he night is indeed the most propitious time for woman's works, 
as a better at mosphere lor the subtle developments of eros and for the 
evocation of profound forces below llie illumined surface of indivi- 
dual Unite const iniisnrss. As fur the extraordinary possibilities that 



80 The Me t ap h y s ic s of S ex 

may be realized in these states when not submerged in hazy sensual 
feelings, we should consider as more than mere romantic poetry what 
Novalis wrote in some of his Inni alia notte (Hymns to the Night). 35 

In reference to the heart, one last point merits attention. Accord- 
ing to hypcrphysical physiology, at the point of death or in a case of 
deadly peril the vital spirits flow to the middle of the human being, to 
%% the heart (they will leave this seat by following an ascending direction 
when death has taken place or when death is apparent, during cata- 
lepsy and during equivalent states of advanced asceticism). The 
same phenomenon can happen in any experience of strong desire and 
can be aroused under some circumstances by the sight of the beloved, 
by evocation of an image of her, 3 ' or by actual nakedness. We often 
find in Oriental writings references to the stopping of breathing in 
the lover through amorous fascination, through extreme desire, or at 
the very moment of sexual embrace. The outward, profane, and 
trivial counterpart of all this is well known to physiology. The most 
common expression of this state is "My heart stopped beating." This 
symptom can also be included among the group indicated earlier 
regarding the potential attributes of eros. And here, too, can be 
established a natural passage from the phenomenology of everyday 
love to the sphere of a sensualism that is no longer profane. We shall 
see this when we come to deal, for instance, with both the mors osadi, 
the death of the kiss, mentioned by the Kabbalists, and the effect of 
the "greetings" of the lady on the Worshippers of Love. 

One further detail may be of interest: Some French troubadours 
spoke of a lady seen not with the eyes or mind but "with the heart." 

The Love-Pain-Death Complex 

At this stage we must examine a complex of fundamental importance 
to the issues we are dealing with: the love-pain-death complex. In it 
we must distinguish the psychic aspect from one which could almost 
be called physical. 

Regarding the first aspect, every arousal of eros in its elementary 

state — when not linked to a real displacement of the ego but instead 

i remaining in the purely human circuit in feeding a passion concen- 

: trated on the loved one — will result in an abnormal saturation of the 

] circuit. This is felt as suffering, a consuming anguish that has no out- 

! let. Mystics often speak of this state of tension. Somerset Maugham 

: wrote that a love like that is not joy but pain, yet it is a pain so acute 

j that it surpasses every pleasure; it has in itself that divine anguish 

which the saints say pervades them during ecstasy. And Novalis 

wrote, "Few people know the mystery of love — they experience 

unassuaged hunger and everlasting thirst."** 

It has hecu called "iliat very rare and mysterious a 1'fi nit v of the 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



81 



flesh which links two human creatures with a tremendous bond of 
insatiable desire.'* On the other hand, such cases of a great passion 
may also spring from an inversion; the symbol is identified with the 
person, and the person is loved for herself, almost "like God in the 
place of God." The intensity of an impulse that, in these cases, longs 
for the absolute is concentrated on the humanity of a given being,- 
who thereby ceases to be a means for the lover and instead becomes; 
the object of an idolatry or, to put it better, a fetish. 39 It is important: 
to note that such a case is precisely the opposite of that of the sacred 
rites and evocations, which we shall examine later on: The partner 
does not acquire a different quality through real communication with 
a higher plane that is more than human, nor does she embody the 
absolute woman; rather, she usurps the attributes belonging to that 
plane by saturating them with the simple, fortuitous human element. 
In the second or physical case, one often meets a kind of vampirism 
that is exercised by one person on another, even unconsciously: 
frequently, dangerous states of sexual bondage are established. 

The situation of great passion provides the favorite subject for 
tragic and romantic art. But in actual fact, situations of this kind can 
also end in crisis and breakdown. This happens through the process 
of idealization of the woman when she is imagined to possess unreal- 
istic moral value that nobody can be expected to live up to. At that 
point, a traumatic fact can make the whole edifice tumble down, dis- 
solving all the "crystallization" of Stendhal and leaving the disap- 
pointing reality standing in all its nakedness. This kind of trauma can 
even be provoked through desire for or possession of the coveted 
woman. Thus Kierkegaard was able to talk of the "perils of happy 
love" and to declare that an unhappy love and everything that a be- 
loved woman may provide in the way of disappointment and betrayal 
are an essential and lucky factor in certain cases, so that it maintains 
the metaphysical tension of eros and avoids its sudden termination; 
for then a certain distance is kept and the identification producing 
the fetishism meets an obstacle, 40 Novalis added, "He who loves 
should always feel a lack and should always keep his wounds 
open." 41 Moreover, in medieval courtly love, the same awareness 
was incorporated in the seemingly paradoxical prohibition against 
Hi laining the desired woman. In fact, the courtly lover did not wish to 
a I lain this consummation; therefore, it was possible to love intensely 
a woman he had never seen, or one chosen precisely because there 
was little hope of possessing her. A foreboding of the disappointment 
ih;ii the actual woman by comparison to the "woman of the mind" 
might cause if possessed explains this. Klagcs rightly emphasized the 
importance of what he railed I he iiros der heme or eros linked to 
remoteness., to iiii:iii;nn:il>ilii\\ which should be interpreted here as a 



IK''' ? ? 

1 



%-t 



?•- 



82 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



favorable moment in every exercise of high erotic tension.and not as 
the refuge of him who makes a virtue of necessity. 42 

But the ability to bear situations of this kind on a non pathological 
level requires the refinement of eros and its displacement to a special 

?*realm that is no longer profane; this was precisely the case in medie- 
val-eroticism. Without such a displacement, the eros aroused in_its 
elementary stage could only be an unquenchable and tormenting 
thirst. One could also consider here the changeover from the situa- 
tion of a fatal passion to that of the type of Don Juan. Don Juan can 
be interpreted as symbolic of the desire that consumes one object 
after another owing to everlasting disappointment and the inability 
of any individual woman to provide the absolute. The lack of satis- 
faction is linked both to the fleeting pleasure of seduction and 
conquest and to the pleasure of doing evil. This is another aspect of 
the Don Juan archetype in some versions of the story. And so the 
series of Don Juan^ loves continues in an endless search for absolute 
possession which always escapes him, just like the torture of 
Tantalus. His hope revives during the initial period of intoxication 
and seduction (which, by reaction to his intimate discomfiture, is 
also accompanied by a hidden loathing and by a need for destruction 
and defilement) but is disappointed again and leaves behind it an 
aversion after the attainment of what he took to be his true purpose, 
namely the mere pleasure of coitus. It is interesting that, contrary to 
other versions, in the oldest Spanish forms of the legend, Don Juan 
does not end by being damned and struck by lightning by the 
Commendatory but withdraws to a monastery. This reflects the ideal 
plane on which his frustrated quest could be appeased in the end; it 
could only be reached by means of a clean break between himself and 
the world of women. 
- Whether in the sphere of art and legend or in real life, a dramatic 

/ and tragic end for lovers seem inevitable. Even when the causes of 

\ such a tragedy seem external and extrinsic to the conscious will and 
human desire of the lovers and appear due to an unlucky destiny, it is 
the inner, transcendental logic of the situation that demands a tragic 
outcome* For as a poet has said; "But a thin veil divides love from 

V death." 

This is the case with Tristan and Isolde. If we wish to take the 
legend in its integrity, the theme of the love potion is far from being 
irrelevant or secondary. We ha v e a 1 ready noted that such potions are 
not mere fictions, for special mixtures can have the power of arousing 
the force of eros in its elementary state by neutraJizinc everything 
that could hinder or reduce its appearance in the empirical 
individual.' Should 1 His happen, it awakens (lie love-death 
|, ^ complex, I he consuming lonv, I lie desire (or death ;nu1 iiimilulalion. 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



83 



The Wagnerian "G-sweet death! So eagerly invoked! O death of 
love!" recalls a theme of "heroic love": "Dead, I live life in living 
death/Love has me dead,/Alas! of what a death/I who am without 
life or death." 44 The music of Wagner presents that state in a rather 
suggestive way (but the finale of the Andrea Ckenier of Umberto 
Giordano is perhaps more musically authentic); however, the 
corresponding text is not so suggestive, being overcrowded with 
mystic and philosophic dross. The famous verses "In des Weltatemsl 
wehendem AWversinken/mrinken/wibezvusst/kochste LusP (To sink and 
drown, unknowing, in the universe which throbs with the breath of 
the world is the greatest pleasure) give the impression of a breakdown 
with a pantheistic background (fusion with the "all/* annihilation in 
the "divine, everlasting-— original oblivion") rather than of a true 
transcendency; furthermore, the purely human element is_£ 
prominent here because the desire for death is dictated by the idea of 
a beyond in which the absolute union of the two lovers can take place 
(Tristan says, "Thus wc are dead to live only in love, inseparably, 
everlastingly joined without end, intent only on ourselves"). 45 
Instead, die effects of the potion in the medieval poem of Gottfried 
von Strasburg had already been expressed in more suitable words: 
"Ihnen war em Tod, em Lebenleine Lust, ein Leid gegeben . . . Ida 
wurden eins und einerlei/die zzviefalt warm er$t f * (To them had been 
given a death, a life, joy, a song. . . , Then they who beforehand 
were two became one thing of the same kind). 

In the case of Tristan and Isolde, mutual hatred is an antecedent to 
the extreme love passion that brings about their downfall. This is a 
situation often found; there are cases in which hatred secretly betrays 
the tension and sexual polarity of two individuals, ready to be 
expressed in the destructive short circuit of consuming love as soon 
as the obstacles created by the individual dispositions have been 
overcome. 

Sensual Pleasure and Suffering; The Masockist-Sadist Complex 

We have already noted that many ancient divinities of love were at 
i he same time divinities of death. This fact can also be interpreted in 
a context different from that indicated earlier in this book. Love- t/ 
desire negatively alters the transcendent individual metaphysically. * 
Psychologically, too, it leads to self-destruction and suffering. It is an 
essential element not only in love- passion but in purely physical love 
as well, in the reduction of sensual pleasure to its minimum terms 
and lo its rarest form. 

Above all, it should he noted that the theme of death is not a simple 
element hdmitfiiif* i<> romantic literature; it is also found in the 
language of lovers :ill over I lie world: **I love you until death/* "HI 



84 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



85 



die without you," and so on. All of these reflect in differing degrees 
the ancient cupio dissolvi ("I long to die") as a liminal sense of 
experience. In his well-known poem "Amore e rnorte," Leopardi 
says that a "desire for death" is "the first effect of true and mighty 
love." It also occurs in the phenomenon of pleasure. After 
Metchnikoff, the school of Freud went on to confirm in the 
individual the existence of a Todestrieb, an urge toward death and 
destruction beyond the pleasure principle, which at first had 
exclusively occupied their attention. The biological explanation 
given for this urge toward death is not important/ 6 just as the 
antagonism supposed to exist between it and the sexual urge must be 
rejected. Instead there remain varying proportions of a mixture of 
the two tendencies j the libido or pleasure element and the destructive 
tendency, a combination that constitutes a substratum common to 
the first and the second. The inscription on a fountain recorded by 
D'Annunzio (in the Vergine delte rocce) tells us how this matter had 
already been recognized by ancient lore: "Spcctarunt nuptas hie se 
Mors atque Volupias — Unus(famaferat), quern quo, vultus erat y> (Death 
and pleasure already saw themselves wedded, and their two faces 
made only one face). On a second level, this deals with the constant 
relationship existing between sexuality and pain. 

In this respect it is not necessary to refer to facts that border on 
pathological abnormality. For instance, it would be banal to recall 
the similarities in moans, cries, and certain movements that the 
phenomenology of coitus and orgasm shares with that of suffering. 
We also know that, particularly among women, in love talk, the word 
"die" is used in many languages for the zenith of the spasm attained 
in full. (In Apuleius, Mei, y II, 17, when asking Lucius to copulate 
with her, Photis says, "Make me die, thou who art about to die,") 
Moreover, the very word "spasm" refers specifically to suffering and 
physical pain. There is truth in the statement "Sensual pleasure is 
agony in the strictest meaning of the word." 4 ' 

To see these facts in the correct light and to embody them into the 
general order of ideas we are dealing with, however, it is necessary to 
know the metaphysical aspect of suffering. Novalis wrote that in ill- 
nesses, there is a "transcendency" that includes an exalted feeling 
capable of translatiort"irtc6-^uperior forces. More generally, that 
which has a negative character often contains a stimulus toward 
intensification of the positive. 48 In many cases this is undoubtedly 
[true of the phenomenon of physical pain, if kept within given limits, 
I Whatever its causes may be, from the internal point of view, every 
'pain is a means by which individual consciousness experiences 
\ something thai has a more or less destructive nature but, lor thai very 
reason, contains an impel us to transcendence its compared with tlic 



j 



closed and stationary unity of the finite individual ♦ Therefore, in a 
certain sense, what Wordsworth said is true, namely that suffering 
has the nature of the infinite. 49 The painful nature of pain is due to ^ 
the passive character of the experience and to the identification of the 
ego, as if through fear, not with the force that alters its existential 
unity and carries it virtually beyond, but with that which undergoes 
the alteration; not with that which strikes but with that which is 
struck. If this were not so, we would have, as Novalis said, a change 
to positive forms of an exalted feeling. 

This can also provide the key for understanding the use of physical 
pain as an ecstatic assistance, found in some deviated forms of asceti- 
cism. For example, the Rufai, an Islamic sect connected to dervish 
Sufism, inflict wounds on themselves during their frenzied rites. A 
sheikh declared that these wounds are made in a special state of mind 
such that they produce no pain but only "a kind of supreme happi- 
ness which is an exaltation of both the body and the soul." Such 
apparently savage practices should not be considered as such, but 
rather a means to open a door. 50 i ' 

Erotic sensual pleasure is a case of alteration wherein the passive ^ , •/ 
nature is partly removed, and therefore the pain seems no longer to 
be just pain but to be mingled with pleasure. If the degree of activity \, 
in lovers were still higher, we would no longer speak of "sensual i 
pleasure" but of a higher intoxication: that nonphysical intoxication \ 
that we have mentioned many times as the potential basis of all eros, 
an intoxication that, in this particular case, in the "spasm" and 
"death" of carnal love would not lose its quality nor be lessened but , 
would, instead, reach its greatest intensity. 

In considering the sensual pleasure-suffering complex, the libido 
mingled with the instinct of death and destruction, we are brought to 
the center of the phenomenology of transcendency presented by love 
in the same profane sphere. The secret of the ambivalence of the 
divinities of desire, sex. sensual pleasure, and, at the same time, 
death is revealed in its other aspect (for instance, Venus is Libitina; 
i he Egyptian goddess of love, Hathor, is also Sekhmet, the goddess 
of death, and so on). 

In this context, we must delve more deeply into a general funda- 
mental element of erotic experience that forms the basis both of pos- 
session and of all strong desire. The desire for and possession of the % 
loved one are what distinguish all sexual love from love in general as 
in benevolence or purely human love. The difference between the 
two is obvious. Pure love wants the real being of its object in a disin- 
terested w:ty: It affirms, it says yes onlologtcally to the other person 
as other person, as a separate being. Its model is theloveof theChris- 
l ian llieistk'C jiul which r.ivcs existence to a lieeeiealurc ami desires it 



? 



86 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



87 






to live its own life without any tendency to dominate or absorb it. As 
against that, sexual love-implies desire as a need to absorb or consume 
the loved being; and when possession does not have the deviated 
character, examined earlier > of compensation for the need of affirma- 
tion of self-worth, it has precisely that meaning^ 1 

Therefore, we may speak of an ambivalence in every strong erotic 
impulse, because the being whom we love, we would at the same time 
like to destroy, to kill, to assimilate, to dissolve within us. For we feel 
that being to be our own complement, and we would like it to cease to 
be a separate being. Therefore, there is an element of cruelty 
attached to desire, and this element is often shown even in coitus 
itself. 52 We may therefore talk of "a hostile rapture of love" 
(Maeterlinck), of the "deadly hatred of the sexes," which is the basis 
of love and which, whether hidden or evident, persists in all its 
effects (D'Annunzio). It was Baudelaire who wrote: "Cruelty and 
sensual pleasure, exactly the same sensations, like extreme cold and 
extreme heat." 53 In fact, we can see, by derivation, in many species of 
animals as well, an instinct for destruction that comes into play at the 
same time as and mingles with the sexual urge. This instinct drives 
some animals so far as to slay the object of their pleasure during 
copulation, and this can happen in man in criminal cases of sadistic 
delirium. The following lines of Lucretius are significant in this 
respect: 

Osculaque adfigtint, quia non estpura volupias, 
Et stimuli subsunt, qui inttigatu laedere id ipsttm 
Quodc unique est, rabies unde illaec germina surgunt. 54 

(And they plant kisses, but it is not a pure pleasure for there are goads 
within that incite them to hurt and to a frenzy from which the seeds 
arise,) 

Spengler, who considers true love between man and woman to be 
an effect of polarity and an identical pulsation of a metaphysical 
nature, says it is akin to hatred and adds that "he who has no race 
does not know this dangerous love." 55 And it is very meaningful that 
in China the expression to indicate a person to whom one is 
irresistibly drawn by love means "predestined foe," 

With regard to possession as a need to annihilate and absorb the 
loved being, psychoanalysis has spoken of an infantile oral phase and 
a cannibalistic phase of libido as complexes that will continue to act in 
the unconscious of adults and will establish relationships between the 
libido of the nutritive function (absorption and assimilation of foods) 
and that of sexual desire. The overstrained and artificial content of 
this eoncepl ought not to stop us from acknowledging a legitimate 
analogy confirmed by more ihau one aspect of actual experience. 



Bossuet wrote, "In the rapture of human love, who does not know 
that he is eating, is devouring his partner, that he would like to incor- 
porate her in every possible way and even to take away with his teeth 
her whom he loves, so as to feed on her, to unite himself with her and 
to live as her?" 56 In Novalis the theme is the same, even though 
expressed at a higher level, when he links the mystery of love as an 
^unquenchable thirst to that of the eucharisL 57 But the point that is 
almost never emphasized is that the food craved is also a food that 
destroys; within the absolute desire to destroy and to absorb is also 
contained the desire to be destroyed and dissolved. We seek in 
woman a "water of life" which is also a water thai kills, a water of the 
kind that in alchemical symbolism is called corrosive water (which 
we shall deal with in its proper place). And such a condition is 
j reached, above all, in the stale of frenzy, in the orgasm and the 
I climax, in what the Hindus call the samarasa of coitus. 

Thus once again we have an ambivalence that arises from the 
potential ..namr.e_.of . ero tic transcendence in general. The suffering 
that can be linked to love and pleasure forces us to acknowledge a 
unique fact beyond the current opposition between sadism and 
masochism. On such a basis Schrenk-Notzing forged the expression 
"algolagnia," which — being formed from Mgos (pain) and lagnos (to 
be aroused sexually) — is intended to designate pleasure obtained 
through sensual pain, but without distinguishing between an active 
algolagnia (sadism) and a negative or passive algolagnia (masochism). 
In the same way, the contemporary sexologists speak of one single 
sadomasochist complex which is not pertinent to sexual psychopathy 
alone because it appears with greater or lesser emphasis in other 
forms of sensuality as well. But in the metaphysics of sex, a refined 
viewpoint, we shall see that the opposite is true. It is commonly 
known that a masochistic predisposition is prevalent in woman, 
whereas a sadistic one is prevalent in man. But when we consider that 
state of identification and amalgamation of two human beings, 
wichout which sexual union is little more than a meeting for mutual 
masturbation, that antithesis is largely overcome. In reality, an erotic 
sadist would not be so if the suffering of his partner were completely 
ext raneotis to him, if it aroused no echo in him; instead, he identifies 
with the pain of his partner. Inhaling stimulates his own exalted 
pleasure. Therefore, he, too, is a masochist, for he satisfies at one and 
the same time his twofold need to suffer and to cause suffering, 
reducing the separation between subjeet and object. The same is true 
of a woman, who identifies with her partner's aggression in her 
masochistic intoxication. 5 " This is largely a question of vicarious 
pleasure through suffering. In natural sexual sadism and masochism, 
that "exchange of hnagiiia lions" is acting which < Ihainloi! examined 



88 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



89 






in his definition of love: to feed reciprocally the tendential nature of 
self-transcendence. The latter effect is obvious in algolagnia whether 
it be active or passive; for in general, if pain is lived as pleasure , it is 
clearly no longer pain. Here, it is instead a matter of that 
transformation of pain into a sensation that is, in its own way, 
favorable and transcendent as we mentioned before. 

We shall now indicate briefly what in the masochist-sadist com- 
plex belongs to psychopathology and perversion and what does not. 
The pathological fact occurs when sadistic or masochistic situations 
become necessary for the "normal" sexual process to take place. To 
give an example, it is unhealthy and perverted when a man can reach 
orgasm only by bearing a woman. It is a different case, however, 
when sadism or masochism are magnifications of an element poten- 
tially present in the deepest essence of eros. Then the "pathological" 
cases represent not deviations of normal instinct but manifestations 
of the deepest layers of the normal instinct, which are latent in certain 
varieties of sexual love. This algolagnia is not exclusively sought by 
perverts but is used consciously by normal people to strengthen and 
extend, in a transcendental and perhaps ecstatic way, the possibilities 
of sex. And we shall see that, apart from individual cases, this situa- 
tion exists in certain collective or ritual forms of mystic sensuality. 

This background is useful in understanding the algolagnic poten- 
tial for a woman in the loss of virginity. Because of most women's un- 
conscious anguish and inhibitions and the carnal and impulsive 
primitive nature of the majority of men, some exceptional and irrevo- 
cable possibilities that the loss of virginity could provide women are 
wasted. Indeed, this female initiation to full sexual life, when carried 
out brutally, often leads to unfavorable repercussions and may even 
harm a woman's ability to achieve normal relations. Instead, we 
should think that if the state of intoxication were to be aroused in its 
acute form, which already contains a destructive element, the pain of 
the defloration together with all the subtle factors linked to it in terms 
of hyperphysical physiology might lead to a heightening of the ecstatic 
potential of that unique and unrepeatable moment. A trauma might 
even occur in the sense of an opening of individual consciousness to 
the supersensual. 

It is obviously hard to gather actual documents. Only a few 
remnants allow us to conjecture that such a practice was at the basis 
of certain ancient forms of the ritual violation of virgins. More 
generally, procedures for the initiation of women are recorded in 
which the sexual act is the means for transmitting a transcendental 
influence; this has been said, for instance, about certain Islamic 
circles. Here initiation may be understood as the transmission ol a 
spiritual influence {harakah) by flic num. (mires expresses the line 



nature of this transmission as knowing by means of a higher light, 
acting and doing by means of a higher freedom, just as the normal 
knowing and doing are conditioned by the degree of light by the 
personal freedom given to every man. 59 The defloration of the virgin 
constitutes the best opportunity for this purpose. 60 In other cases it is 
possible to conceive that the whipping of the woman is used as an 
equivalent so as to produce the same liminal psychic climate. In this 
respect, too, practices continued secretly up to the present day in 
certain circles enable us to conjecture the same objective basis for 
ancient sexual riles also which are now misunderstood and have a bad 
reputation. 61 

Erotic Ecstasy and Mystic Ecstasy 

We shall deal later with forms of sadism that have no specific sexual 
links. It is worth noting again the ability to convert painful sensations 
into sensual ones. For example, we must mention the typical histori- 
cal case of Elisabeth of Genton, who through whipping was brought 
"into the condition of a bacchante in delirium," 02 and also the case of 
the Carmelite nun Maria Maddalena dei Pazzi, who spoke of an inner 
fire which threatened to overwhelm her and whose eroticism is 
obvious from her cries while being whipped: "Enough, do not kindle 
anymore this fire which is consuming me. This is not the death I wish 
for , because it gives me too much joy and sensual pleasure," 
Moreover, lustful visions were appearing to her. The study of these 
borderlines where the factor of self- transcendence is forced rather 
than willed leads us to emphasize the points common to both mystic 
and erotic ecstasy. This commonality has been often underlined by 
psychologists and psychiatrists but always with the intention of 
denigrating some forms of religious experience and classifying them 
as erotic-hysterical deviations. 

Objectively, we should acknowledge that these ecstasies often do 
have an impure and suspect nature and, except in certain cases, have 
little to do with true spirituality. Here we are in an intermediate 
sphere where an inversion may even happen, in the sense that the 
sexual element proper remains the fundamental one, the 
"mysticism" serving only to feed its deviant and exalted form/' 3 In 
Christian mysticism this happens quite often. Just as it is 
characteristic of Christianity to humanize the divine rather than 
divinize the human, so in that mystical theology, making the sacred 
sensual (with a significant recurrence of conjugal and erotic symbols) 
lakes the place of making sexuality sacred, as is done in Dionysiac, 
Tannic, and initiatory forms. Thus considered, theecstatic facts of a 
j'.iven niyslieal theology may form a part of the phenomenology of 
1 1 Mtiseeiidenee proper to profane eros. The points ol contact cited 



i. 



90 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



between "mystic" ecstasy and erotic ecstasy explain how, when these 
ecstasies reach a special intensity, "one of them may be the 
consequence of the other or else both may arise at the same 
moment/' 64 This also clarifies the occurrence of strongly erotic 
images as "temptations" in the cases of the relapse of some mystics; 
they are forms of oscillation in the manifestations of one single 
energy* Typical, for example, are some of the expressions of Saint 
Girolamus, who in the most severe ascetic discipline and fasting felt 
his soul burning with desire and the hear of his lust blazing in his 
flesh "as though he were on a funeral pyre," 

In many primitive peoples , the techniques to attain ecstasy are 
often essentially the same as those of some erotic rites. This is the 
case, first, for dancing, which has been, since the most ancient times 
and not only among primitive peoples, one of the most widely used 
methods to attain ecstasy. The sensual dances of today reflect this in a 
degraded form. Here we have a phenomenon with a tendential 
convergence of content in various forms of one single intoxication. In 
this phenomenon, however, we can recognize yet another sign of the 
virtual power of eros to carry man beyond the individual. In relation 
to this point, Rumi wrote: "He who knows the virtue of the dance 
lives in God because he knows how loves slays/' 65 And this may also 
be said to be the key to the practices of the chain or school of Islamic 
mysticism that has continued down the centuries and thai deems 
Rumi to be its master. 

The Experience of Coitus 

Writers have always recognized as important the sincerity that pos- 
sesses lovers at the moment of sexual union. At that moment, all teas- 
ing, frivolity, meaningless gallantry, and sentimental trilling come to 
an end. The libertine and even the whore, unless completely anes- 
thetized in the exercise of passive and apathetic service, are no ex- 
ception to the rule. "When one is making love, one does not laugh; 
perhaps one may just smile. During the spasm one is as serious as 
death." 66 Every diversion ceases. Besides the sincerity, coitus 
implies a particularly high degree of concentration imposed on the 
lover by the very development of the process. For that reason any 
matter that might distract him could have an erotically or, even 
worse, a physiologically inhibiting effect. This is implied both 
emotionally and symbolically by the total giving of oneself to the 
other in coitus, even in the case of a casual union. This behavior, 
sincerity, and concentration are reflections of the deepest meaning of 
the act of love and its hidden mystery. 

We said in the Introduction how hard it is to gather evidence per- 
taining (t> I ho experience of man and woman at the climax olYoiius; 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



91 



this difficulty is due not only to a natural reluctance to speak about it, 
but also to the fact that the peak of the orgasm often coincides with a 
state of reduced awareness and sometimes even with a break in the 
continuity of consciousness. And that is natural — just what we would 
expect during a state of partial but also sudden "transcendence" in 
the cascof individuals. whose normal consciousness is finite, empiri- 
cal, and conditioned. Ordinary consciousness is hardly able ro keep 
itself unimpaired at the highest point of coitus, whereas it can pass 
with full awareness over the threshold of sleep in which a similar 
change of state and break in level are realized. However, between the 
two cases there should be, in principle, a difference owing to the exal- 
tation, the intoxication, the ecstasy that belong to an erotic state gen- 
erally and that are absent during the passage to the state of sleep. 
Caused in the beginning by sexual magnetism, such an exaltation 
might support or constitute a favorable condition for the continuity 
of consciousness and therefore for a possible "opening." But it is 
hard to say when and to what extent that happens in profane love. 
The available documentation is insufficient for a scientific or objec- 
tive examination. Strictly speaking, we should not restrict ourselves 
to the experiences of people of our own race or era. The inner expe- 
riences of peoples in other ages might not have been exactly the same 
as those of the modem European. In the matters that follow, we shall 
not overlook that material but shall include it and also make use of 
some erotic literature that confirms our empirical research. 

The Upanishads 67 have mentioned ecstatic raptus, the ability to 
"suppress consciousness of both the outer and inner world" when 
"man is embraced by woman"; in a certain way this experience is 
analogous with what takes place at the manifestation of atman or ; the 
transcendental ego ("thus the soul, when it is embraced by the atman , 
which is knowledge itself, no longer sees inner or outer tilings"). 
When the hero of the novel The Sorrows of Young Werthgr says, 
"Thenceforward the sun, the moon and the stars can go forward on 
their path in peace, for I know not whether it be day or night, and the 
whole universe disappears before me," this may sound merely 
romantic, but in truth there is something more to it, because raptus is 
[he reality of coitus confirmed in the Upanishads. At the beginning of 
orgasm, a change of state takes place— a further strcngthing of the 
state that occurred tendcntially at the time of falling love — and in an 
extreme case, during the spasm, the individual undergoes a 
i ran ma tic experience of the power that "kills." This, however, passes 
through the individual instead of being held and absorbed, 

( kmccrning l lie si ales thai take place in the deepest structure of the 
individual, ii is necessary in distinguish between ilie case of true 
union hr I wee 1 1 man and woman based un the inaj'iiclism j^eneraied 



?•?. 



92 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



93 



N 



by their polarly differentiated beings, and the case of mere mutual 
masturbation, whose selfish purpose is the organic spasm, rather 
than true communication or mutual permeation. This occurs when 
the mere "search for pleasure" and the "principle of pleasure" over- 
shadow the union, giving it an extrinsic character. In this case each of 
the two lovers is affected by a kind of impotence and only finds enjoy- 
ment for himself or herself. By overlooking the reality of his partner, 
the lover fails to reach contact with her intimate, subtle, and "psy- 
chic" substance, which alone can nourish a dissolving and propitia- 
tory intensity of ecstasy . It is possible that in the Bible the expression 
"to know" a woman, where it is used as a symptom for possessing 
her, may refer to the contrary attitude in coitus. It is interesting that 
in the Kamasutra (II. x) a union with a woman of a lower caste is called 
"the copulation of the eunuchs" when it is made to last only until the 
man's pleasure has been fulfilled. 

Interesting evidence is provided by a young woman who, during 
the sexual spasm, had the impression that she was "being trans- 
ported, so to speak, into a higher realm ... as at the beginning of 
narcosis brought about with chloroform." 68 Imagination has only an 
accessory role in descriptions such as the following which can be used 
as direct evidence: "He and she were now one single person. ... He 
was no longer himself. He was the half of a new body; because of this, 
everything was so queer, up, up, up. A sudden blinding light flashed 
with a deafening noise which was not a noise at all; they were in a 
whirlpool of hues and shapes, cast into eternity; then there was a 
sudden shock and they fell down, down, down. He closed his eyes 
with fright, down, down, they would have gone on falling for ever, 
down, down" (L. Langley). The idea of a "deafening noise without 
any sound," in fact, is found in the phenomenology of initiatory 
consciousness, as is the sensation of falling. But it should be noted 
that this sensation often causes an instinctive jerk, when it occurs as 
we fall asleep and also during a phase — recalled by Baudelaire in his 
Paradis artificiel — in the experiences caused by hashish. A 
convergent thread is brought forward in the testimony of a person 
mortally wounded in an explosion, an experience leading to an actual 
"opening of the self" and "departing" as if death had suddenly 
occurred: "The explosion was so nearby that I did not even notice it; 
I might almost say that I wis not aware of it. All of a sudden my 
normal outward awareness was cut off. I became clearly aware of 
falling ever further downwards with a motion which was speeded up 
outside of time. I felt that at the end of this fall, which did not make 
me afraid, some ultimate fact would be thrown wide open in me. 
Instead, the fall stopped all of a sudden. Al I he same momeni I came 
hack In myself and (omul I hat I was on I he ground amnio* wreckage. 



r 



K 



uprooted trees, and so on." These are typical feelings accompanying 
a change in the state or level of consciousness. The feeling described 
above agrees with the following one, whose second phase is 
interesting because of a reference to positive action on the part of the 
woman: "He seemed to fall headlong with her giddily as if in a lift 
whose steel cables had broken. From one moment to another, they 
could be shattered. Instead, they went on sinking endlessly and, 
when her arms encircled his neck, they were no longer falling 
headlong but dropping and rising at one and the same time beyond 
consciousness" (F. TMess), 

Another quotation also has value as evidence: "There are two 
bodies, then only one body; one body within the other, one life 
within the other life. There was only one need, one search, one 
penetration, down, down, always deeper, up, up, always higher, 
through the flesh, through the soft burning darkness, swelling and 
endless, without time" (J. Ramsay Ullman). 

In connection with ever-deeper penetration and immersion into 
the woman's womb, several have described a feeling of union with a 
limitless substance, with an obscure "raw material," The dissolving 
intoxication of this experience can bring a person to the very ease of 
unconsciousness and, for some, even to the point of convulsive accel- 
eration of the orgasm. We will see that the content of these not 
exceptional experiences, when they are stripped of the most 
superficial emotional circumstances, corresponds significantly with 
the elementary symbols aroused in the magical and initiatory use of 
coitus. The following quotation may also be of interest: "My 
heartbeat became faster and faster. Then I underwent a crisis which 
gave me the feeling of a voluptuous suffocation that, in the end, 
changed into an awful compulsion, during which I lost my senses and 
felt myself sinking" (J. J. Le Faner; a passage about a young woman). 

At one point Novalis said that "woman is the supreme visible nour- 
ishment which forms the point for the passage from the body to the 
soul," 69 and he noted that in the development of erotic experience 
two sets, in two opposite directions, converge. Starting with looking, 
talking, kissing, embracing, and so on up to coitus "are steps of a 
descending ladder by which the soul goes down" toward the body. 
But at the same time, said Novalis, there is another, ascending ladder 
by which the body goes up toward the soul . We can speak therefore 
of soul being made into body while the body is itself refined until an 
intermediate condition, neither of the soul nor of the body, is 
stabilized. This corresponds to the state of erotic intoxication. The 
removal of the boundary between soul and body comes about, then, 
ill rough woman, leading to the integrating expansion of 
consciousness into profound areas normally shut oil by I he threshold 



4 



94 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



95 



of unconsciousness. The expression "to be united with life" now 
acquires a special importance.' In another passage Novalis wrote 
about the giddy light that can be compared to that of coitus, wherein 
"the soul and body touch each other" and begin a process of deep 
transformation. Though the physical use of women in profane love 
for this purpose is rare and fleeting, it is none the less real nor void of 
implication. We choose this passage from a writer for its significant 
indications: "Something mysterious happened within him, 
something which had never happened to him before. ... It 
penetrated all his being as if a balsam mixed with a very strong wine, 
which made him drunk at once, had been poured into the marrow of 
his bones. As if in an intoxication, but without any 
impurity. . . . This feeling had neither beginning nor end and was 
so strong that his body followed it without any reference to his 
brain. . . . The bodies were not united but their life was. He had lost 
his own individuality. ♦ . . He w r as transported into a state of which 
he could not even grasp the duration. No language has been invented 
to describe that supreme moment of existence, whence it was 
possible to see the whole of life, naked and 
understandable. . . . Then they descended again" (Liam 
CTFlaherty), 

From another point of view, the idea that the free power of sex in 
coitus can act in a purifying and cathartic manner belongs to Diony- 
siac rites and all other kindred types. But certain moments of profane 
love may also be compared to those rites. Lawrence certainly cannot 
be called an initiate, but he was neither theorizing nor merely 
producing literature when he made one of his characters say, "He felt 
he had touched the most savage state of his nature. . . . How poets 
and all the others tell lies! They make you believe that they need 
sentiment, whereas the thing which they need more is that acute, 
destructive, tremendous sensuality ♦ . ♦ sensuality without phrases, 
pure, burning sensuality is necessary also to purify and enlighten the 
spirit ." We have already noted that, in general, ihe same writer stops 
at a deviated mysticism of the flesh, and the phrases given above refer 
to a healing experience which, for a sexually deviated type — which 
corresponds to the vast majority of modern Anglo-Saxons — may 
represent a use of sex without curbs or inhibitions. Nonetheless we 
also have here evidence of a purification, a removal or neutralization 
of everything that in the life of the outer, social individual creates a 
barrier and hinders any contact with the deeper layers of being, even 
when a real transfiguring element is lacking. Therefore it is right to 
speak of simple "sensuality," as in fact Lawrence does. Of course, in 
circumstances of this kind the positive aspects are random and lew, 
being never valued properly by I heir subject, and for this reason they 



also remain incapable of any further development or cultivation. But 
the ambiguity of Lawrence is that of a "pagan*' religion of the flesh. 
Spengler saw correctly that the Dionysiac orgy considers the body as 
its enemy, just as ascetic practices do; and Jules Romain was right 
when he wrote about the "blind destruction of the flesh by means of 
the flesh." 

In the direct evidence provided by certain lovers, we quite often 
find situations that recall what we said earlier about the hebephrenic 
case reported by Marro. Accounts of trying to prolong the sexual 
spasm beyond a given limit by persistent stimulating procedures 
speak of the unbearable feeling of a power — "like that of electricity" 
— which rises from the kidneys and runs along the backbone with a 
tendency to go upward. At this stage in most instances the experience 
ceases to be desirable and seems to have only a physical and painful 
character; one cannot bear it, and so one stops. l Such cases are the 
consequences of an inner behavior that permits nothing but physical 
perceptions. It is as if, at a given stage, an exclusively physical circuit 
replaces the psychic circuit of exalted sexual intoxication, giving rise 
to a deterioration in the process, as only negative sensations reach the 
threshold of consciousness. But behind this, perhaps, lies a 
phenomenology of tentative forms of the awakening of the kundalini, 
the supreme fundamental power to which Tantric yoga is oriented. 
These same forms can also appear at random during sexual union. 
And "the quivering, the quick devouring fire more rapid than 
lightning" of J. j. Rousseau is another instance of this experience. 
Evocatory and stimulating signs for the awakening of the 
fundamental power are also contained in the customs of some non- 
European traditions — for example, in the so-called belly dance, 
when performed by a woman with its true erotic background. Here 
we have gone outside the area of merely profane eros because this 
dance, of which the West has only a banal "restaurant" idea, has a 
sacred and traditional character. It is made up of three moments, 
each distinguished by the height of the arms' movements and by the 
expressions of the face, which correspond to three periods in the life 
of woman, the potential awakener of the fundamental power in 
coitus, and it is that time that the typical basic, rhythmic movement 
of the belly and loins appears. This testimony by a person (G. de 
Giorgio) who attended an authentic performance of this dance is of 
interest: "I attended a real belly dance, performed by an Arab woman 
with squatting Arabs syncopating the rhythm; I was the only 
European. It was unforgettable. This dance, being sacred, of course, 
is an uncoiling of the kundalini, with an escape from above. It is 
terrific from a symbolical point of view, for it is the woman who 
performs it ;nul she suffers almost as much (the real dance is very 



l 



96 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



97 



difficult) as in childbirth, and it is childbirth; but the most beautiful 
and overwhelming thing is that the woman herself accompanies it 
with a song; songs which transport you and emphasize the escape, 
the cycle of articulation, the ascensional deification, the passage from 
ring to ring from the first to the final center." 72 If ethnological data 
were not gathered by incompetent people who operate with the same 
spirit as stamp collectors, evidence of this kind could be built up and 
"civilised" people would most likely find reason to be ashamed of 
themselves in ascertaining to what dimension their love life is in 
general reduced. 

In the medical field , cases have been witnessed in which women, at 
the peak of orgasm, swoon or fall into a semicataleptic condition that 
can last for some hours. Cases of this kind were mentioned by Mante- 
gazza in the eighteenth century of his Fisiologia delta donna > whereas 
they are given in the treatises of Hindu erotics as normal and natural 
in certain types of women, 73 Some fatal consequences due to these 
symptoms are mentioned by D'Aurevilly in his novel Le Rideau 
cramaisi. This is not a question of hysterical facts — a generic 
expression which explains nothing and often only replaces one 
problem with another — but of phenomena that can be readily 
understood within the metaphysics of sex. But where there is no 
break of consciousness, often certain states that accompany 
"pleasure" and seem to be successive repercussions of the peak of the 
orgasm are themselves indicative enough. They are states that the 
following passage describes quite well: "Sometimes when between 
his arms, she was taken by a kind of almost far-sighted sluggishness, 
in which she believed she was becoming, by transfusion of another 
life, a transparent, fluid creature permeated by a very pure, 
immaterial element" (D'Annunzio, II Placere). Balzac referred to a 
like sensation with a greater, literary and idealizing margin: "When, 
lost in the infinite of a swooning, my soul was separated from my 
body and hovered far from the earth, I used to think that those 
pleasures were a means to eliminate matter and to release the spirit to 
make its lofty flight." In actual fact a kind of lucid trance, alongside a 
condition of physical weariness, is common enough in lovers after 
coitus. Possibly it is a diffused echo of the change of state that has 
objectively taken place at the peak of coitus even when not perceived 
as such: a last thin resonance. Usually the subtle, hyperphysical 
element of this echo, however, is soon neutralized because either the 
person comes back to his sense or that element is altered by feelings 
of simple, human, amorous nearness. 

The Metaphysics of Modesty 

"lie sunk in iliat abyss til pleasure from which love rises lo tlvesur 



* 



face, pale, silent, full of a deathly sadness" (Colette). If situations like 
those discussed in the last section are contrasted with the depressed 
one described by Colette or in the well-known saying "Animal post 
coitum triste" (An animal is sad after coitus), the explanation is given 
by that very saying itself inasmuch as it refers precisely to animals, 
that is, to a human love more or less more ferarum (according to the 
customs of wild beasts). In particular, these negative or depressed 
states follow false unions, those occasions when one or both partners 
seek their own pleasure. In effect > these depressed states are very like 
those that tend to follow masturbation. 

However, a different explanation is also possible, although it takes 
us outside the most immediate experience of individual conscious- 
ness and cannot be applied to the vast majority of cases. It is not the 
explanation given by Christian ethics which starts off with a theo- 
logical hatred of sex and finds in the depression, sadness, and even 
disgust after "pleasure" direct evidence of its sinful nature. Certainly 
a confused feeling of guilt may enter into the matter, but it would be 
on a transcendental and not a moral plane. In this, we presuppose the 
existence of an ascetic predisposition, a tendency toward separation 
in the depths of consciousness. This concerns men almost 
exclusively; women very seldom feel sad or depressed after 
participating willingly in lovemaking; in fact the opposite is rather 
the case unless extrinsic, social, or other factors (such as unconscious 
inhibitions) are involved. 

This possibility should be examined, since other manifestations 
that are also symptomatic of erotic behavior, among them the pheno- 
menon of modesty, seem to lead us to the same point. To tackle this 
problem, we must return again to the dual character, positive and 
negative, of eros that we examined at the end of the previous chapter. 
Indeed, in this chapter we have directed our attention to those 
phenomena of a positive transcendence — delineating the metaphysics 
of sex via the myth of the hermaphrodite — which may figure in 
profane eroticism itself. But we should also consider the other 
possibility indicated by the myth of Pandora, namely eros as mere 
extroverted desire that leads to procreation and, in satisfying itself, 
does not suppress its existential privation but rather confirms it and 
perpetuates it by leading beyond the illusory "immortality of the 
species," not to life but to death. Since for most men and women, 
profane love terminates by feeding the circle of procreation, we 
should consider the following problem; Does man seek woman 
because he feels privation in himself, or does the presence of woman 
and her action create the privation by causing an inner yielding, 
drawing liiin out of himself, awakening in him the condition of desire 
:i]u\ lusl J Weimisi decide, as did Kierkegaard/ 1 between scenarios: 



98 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



99 



Before meeting woman, man mistakes himself for whole and 
sufficient- Afterward, he finds he needs her and becomes aware that 
he is incomplete; or is it the encounter with woman that makes him 
extroverted, propelling him from his proper center and harming 
him? 

This is a complex problem. Its solution differs from one case to 
another, while the evaluation differs according to the point of refer- 
ence. Whether he feels it or not, privation is constibstantial with the 
finite individual; thus the restriction of his ego cannot be deemed a 
value, whereas transcendence embodies a value; whence arises the 
order of ideas emphasized in this chapter, where we have discussed 
the positive aspects of erotic experience. But if we consider all the cir- 
cumstances in which self- transcendence does not in any way allow for 
an ascent or an integration or lead to the rediscovery of Self, then in 
the fact of yielding to the lust for a woman one can see a fall and an 
alteration of the innermost being or almost betrayal of a higher 
vocation. Apprehension of these, even if only in a confused way, will 
often steer man away from the search for self-realization through the 
mystery of sex due to the problems inherent in this path. In this case 
the power and destructive charm possessed by woman, the deceitful 
ecstasy interposed by the intimate feminine substance may appear to 
be deadly, hostile, and contaminating- Without going so far as the 
"Foemina janua diabuli" (Woman is the door to the devil) of 
Tertuilian, such as the dominating point of view in ascetic and 
initiatory circles. It is summarized by the biblical saying "Give not 
power over thy soul unto woman" (Prov* 31:3). 

As indicated, the presupposition for inner reactions of such a kind 
is some rudimemary acrivation or awareness in the individual of what 
would be called in the Orient the extrasamsaric element, the tran- 
scendent virility, or, more simply still, the supernatural principle of 
the human personality. In the mass such an awareness constitutes an 
exceptional phenomenon* However, there exist behaviors that 
should be explained according to an obscure, residual shadow of that 
awareness. 

It is in this context that we may deal briefly with the problem of 
modesty, but first of all we should make some distinctions. There are 
some general forms of modesty that have no specific relation to sex: 
for instance, modesty as regards certain physiological functions 
(defecation, urination) in addition to modesty in general concerning 
one's own nakedness. Some people believe that such modesty is not, 
inborn and they cite the fact that neither babies nor certain primitive 
peoples show this modesty. But here we are falling into (he usual 
mistake of deeming "natural" in man thai which is merely primitive. 
The (null is thai humanity has certain dispositions that arc 



i 



consubstantial with its "idea," and those dispositions may remain 
latent in the primitive stages and only show themselves in an 
adequately developed humanity when an appropriate environment is 
formed, which might be called civilized. In such a case we should not 
talk of an "acquired" sentiment but of a passage from the capability 
to the actuality of preexisting dispositions. In fact, it is possible to see 
in more than one instance that the more noble the human faculty, the 
slower its development. 

In its more general and nonsexual aspect, the phenomenon of 
modesty arises from a subconscious impulse in man to put a certain 
distance between himself and "nature." The definition of modesty 
given by Melinaud is partly right, namely a shame that we feel 
because of the animal in us. Thus we should not expect this instinct 
to show itself in prepersonal stages (babies) or involuted stages 
(savages), for that higher principle or dimension of the ego which 
can bring about such impulses is either wholly latent or eclipsed. 

Let us now pass on to modesty in those forms linked to sexuality. 
First we will consider a possible meaning of modesty related to 
nakedness, one different from that given just now; next we will 
examine modesty specifically linked to the sexual organs; and third 
we will examine modesty connected with the sexual act. As regards 
the first two, we must make a very clear distinction between male and 
female modesty. The deep, metaphysical significance related to the 
modesty of woman is generally disputed. Her modesty, just like her 
shyness, "bashfulness," and "innocence," is a simple ingredient of 
her sexually attractive quality and can be included among the tertiary 
characteristics of her sex. However, we shall come back to this point 
in the next chapter. Such an aspect of "functional" usage is, on the 
contrary, foreign to male modesty. Counterevidence for female 
modesty as a nonethical but sexual fact is that, as is well known, 
modesty relating to their own nakedness ends altogether when 
women meet each other and makes way for pleasure in exhibitionism 
(unless there is some inferiority complex or fear of having a less 
beautiful and less desirable body than the other woman) whereas it 
persists among man (here we leave aside what belongs to phases of a 
civilization that have become primitive, such as the present phase). 
Owing to its functional character, female modesty has, next, a 
psychological and symbolic meaning from which arise the variety 
and mutability of its main object. We know that until a very short 
time ago the greatest object of sexual modesty among Arab and 
Persian women was the mouth, so much so that, if a girl had been 
surprised by a man when she had only a shirt on her back, she would 
Ikivc used it at once to cover her mouth without worrying about 
showing much nunc intimate parts. Iw Chinese women, the led 



100 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



101 



were a special object of modesty, and they seldom were willing to 
show them even to their own husbands. Indeed, we could give other 
queer localities as the object of modesty, depending on the peoples 
and epochs. It is a fact that in this context a given part of the body has 
only symbolic values and to show that part and not to hide it has the 
implicit meaning of opening oneself. Because of the symbolic 
functional nature of modesty,, whereby the part represents the real 
and most intimate being itself, we can understand the variability of 
its object although it would be more natural for modesty to reside in 
the sexual parts of the female body. This idea, indeed, is reflected in 
Latin expressions like "to taste" or "to use the pudicitia" (modesty) of 
a woman, which are synonymous with taking away her virginity or 
with her utmost erotic surrender. 

The sexually functionaJ nature of female modesty, often mistaken 
for having an ethical and independent character, is clearly shown by 
the fact that a woman displays modesty when male attention is 
attracted to some part of her naked body that may indeed be less than 
what she might proudly display in public without a shade of 
hesitation; for instance, she would be ashamed to show her panties by 
raising her dress, whereas she will display herself with shameless, 
animal innocence in the latest bikini. One cannot deduce a lack of 
modesty from revealing clothing, for special forms of modesty have 
been witnessed among people who go about naked or almost naked; 
in the same way the presence of modesty should not be inferred from 
the presence of clothes since the fact that a person is covered is in no 
way a guarantee for the presence of true bashfulness. ° Often women 
use clothes only to produce a more exciting effect by hinting at what 
their nakedness could offer. Montaigne said that "there are things 
which we hide only to show them better." 

We should look in a different light at the fact that throughout 
almost the whole world the idea of the genital organs is connected 
with shame (the pudenda , the putende y les parties honteases, etc.). And 
this also extends to lovemaking, for lovers normally show r modesty 
not only in physical union, but also in much less intimate activities. 
Vico went so far as to link the feeling of being seen by a god to the 
shame that in primordial times drove human couples to hide when 
copulating. Some remarks of Schopenhauer deserve attention. He 
asked why it is that people in love exchange their first glances, full of 
desire, in a hidden way and almost fearfully, and why they hide 
during intimacy and in the act of union, just as if caught in a misdeed. 
Schopenhauer remarked that this would remain incomprehensible 
unless the obscure, transcendental feelings of guilt or belrayal were 
inherent in I he abandonment of sexual love; but this is inadquate for 



it would reduce life to nothing but misery, and since, according to 
Schopenhauer, the final purpose of cros is procreation lovers would 
naturally be ashamed and feel guilty when they obey the p roc read ve 
instinct, which is destined to perpetuate the pain and distress of the 
world in new beings. "If optimism were right and our existence was 
the gift of heavenly goodness enlightened with knowledge and 
therefore a precious, glorious, joyous thing, to be received with 
thankfulness, then the act which perpetuates that existence would 
have a totally different physiognomy. 76 But this is rather 
unconvincing. Indeed, Schopenhauer's pessimism is the product of a 
merely personal philosophy; the phenomena that he refers to also 
occur in civilizations free of pessimism and far from dualistic 
conceptions such as the Christian antithesis between "flesh" and 
spirit, Schopenhauer rightly emphasized an independent existential 
fact, from which derive the various pedantic and theological 
condemnations of sexual relations that still persist, though devoid of 
any deep significance. This is the ambivalence of eros which seduces 
us with its alluring intoxication that can surmount our finite, broken 
individuality, yet also poses the risk of a fall and betrayal of a higher 
vocation. The cause of this fall and betrayal is the illusory and 
uncertain nature of immediate sexual satisfaction and of everything 
from the value of children to the social and sentimental 
accouterments of love and sexual relationships which substitutes for 
or postpones the realization of absolute being. Last, at least in man, if 
not in woman, there may be an obscure premonition of the wound 
that desire inflicts on the supernatural principle of his innermost 
being whenever the poison is not transmuted into a medicine and 
liberating ecstasy is not derived from the adulteration. Such behavior 
is not associated with an idea or a concept of reflective consciousness. 
The symptoms of sexual modesty and the other facts mentioned 
above occur even among the most ordinary humanity like distant 
shadows of the reality of sexual metaphysics. Incomprehensible 
within the framework of a biological and naturalistic concept of the 
human being, 77 these facts have been almost ignored by the social 
sciences. We deem artificial the psychoanalytic interpretations of 
primitive sexual taboos and archaic complexes of the subconscious. 
The only deeper interpretation is that of Schopenhauer, who, as we 
have already seen, brought into play an obscure transcendental 
feeling of guilt; but here the reference to the idea that "life is pain" is 
as inadequate as the popular interpretation of Buddhism (shared by 
Schopenhauer himself), according to which it is the pain of existence 
that gives birth to the urge toward realization of samadhi — 
cnlighleiinienl and nirvana. 



t 



102 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



103 



The Meaning of the Orgy 

Apart from cases of natural regression (as in certain modern and 
almost chaste forms of feminine lack of inhibition) or of licentious 
breakdown, one of the few contexts wherein eros is seen in a naked 
form, free of inhibition, is the collective, orgiastic rites and festivals; 
these are experiences, however, that lake us outside the 
phenomenology of profane love and sexuality. On the basis of what 
we said before, it seems natural that the unconscious "guilt complex" 
linked to sex should disappear because here the oscillation of eros is 
resolved in a sacred manner, corresponding to the positive dimension 
of eros and opposed to the mere lust of the individual. Even the most 
primitive peoples feel repugnance toward an open and public 
performance of the sexual act, whereas such a feeling does not exist 
when that act takes place within a cultural background. Besides the 
ritual nakedness, a woman also performed the act called anasurma in 
ancient Greece, in which, following a divine paradigm, she removed 
her clothes and revealed the most intimate pan of her body, thus 
demonstrating how the "functional modesty" of woman can 
disappear altogether when a sacred situation is involved. 

A reference to the metaphysics of the orgy may be timely at this 
point, where we are passing from the phenomenology of profane love 
to that of sacred, the subject of the next chapters. In effect, orgiastic 
forms represent something intermediate; the individual conditional 
qualities of eros are surpassed in them, but at the same time copula- 
tion does lead to insemination and the possibility of fertilization. 
However, according to the available information, fewer cases of 
fecundation occurred during these sacred collective orgies than 
would be normally expected, as though the sexual power were 
oriented from within in a different direction. 

The most immediate and obvious purpose of orgiastic promiscuity 
is the neutralization and exclusion of anything concerning the "social 
individual." In the field of ethnology the idea of promiscuity as a 
"naturalistic" original stage has been largely surpassed. 78 In actual 
fact, promiscuity, even among savages, seems almost always 
restricted to special occasions linked to a ritual element. Whether 
they are orgies of primitive and outlandish peoples or kindred 
festivals of Western antiquity, the common denominator is the 
temporary removal of all prohibitions, all differences of social status, 
and all bonds that normally hinder the manifestation of eros in its 
elementary form. In principle, the practice of promiscuity excludes 
not only the conditional qualities of the social individual but even 
qualities of the deeper layer of the individual as a personality. It 
tends, therefore, to bring out an almost total freedom. 

Sonic ol I hese archaic festivals had ;i seasonal diameter llvai resulted 



*. 



in one-sided interpretations by ethnologists who did note that the 
forms that they studied were already decadent. Whether or not 
specific "magical" intentions were present (fecundity and fertility 
rites, etc.), the essential purpose of the timings of such festivals must 
be sought in cosmic-analogical relations. Thus the emperor Julian 
remembered that the date of the summer solstice was chosen for 
celebration because at that time the sun seems to be freed from its 
orbit and lost in the infinite. This cosmic background and "climate" 
are appropriate to a kindred tendency toward orgiastic and Dionysiac 
freedom. The Roman name for a festival that, except for popular 
license, kept partial but unmistakable features of an orgy as well was 
the Saturnalia. It is also meaningful from another standpoint. 
According to the popular interpretation, this festival celebrated a 
temporary return to the primordial age when Saturn-Chronos had 
been kind and there were no laws nor social distinctions between 
men. This is the exoteric interpretation of a more profound idea; it 
recalled a mythical past in temporal and historical terms and the 
participation in a state beyond time and history. Man's truest end 
purpose, which is to surpass in his inner being the form and limit of 
the individual, was presented in terms of an abolition of social 
distinctions and prohibitions. 

Taken overall, the orgiastic festivals, upheld by holy institutional 
structures and in a climate suitable for collective action, tended, 
therefore, toward catharsis and cleansing of the mind, toward 
neutralizing all the layers of empirical consciousness by sexuality. 
We said before that this could also be brought about in cases of strong 
profane eros in individual unions. The term used just now, 
"cleansing," on the other hand, enables us to establish further 
symbolic associations. In fact, in traditional symbolism, the Waters 
have represented the undifferentiated substance of all life, that is, life 
in the state prior to any form and therefore free from all the 
limitations of individual existence. On this basis, in the rites of many 
traditions, "immersion in the waters has symbolized regression to the 
preformal, total regeneration and a new birth, since immersion is 
equivalent to a dissolution of forms and to a reintegration into the 
undifferentiated way of preexist ence." 79 The Waters thus represent 
the clement that "purifies" and, in religious and exoteric terms, 
"washes away sin" and regenerates; the meaning of various rites of 
lustration has been preserved in the Christian sacrament of baptism 
as well. 

To anticipate the category of ideas that we shall deal with in the 
next chapter, we should observe next that the Waters and the deified 
female principle in terms of a Goddess or Mother seem to be closely 
linked lo rneli other in hadilioiuil symbolism; ihe archaic sign of the 



104 The Metaphysics of Sex 

Waters V is the same as that of the Woman and Goddess or Great 
Mother and is a simple outline of the shape of the female pubis and 
vulva. We may say that this serves to establish the fundamental 
character of the orgies, which is a liberating regression into 
formlessness carried out under the feminine sign. To bring forward 
facts of a slightly different nature, it may be interesting to note the 
connections between the Waters and the Apsarases, "heavenly 
courtesans" who incarnate in order to seduce the Hindu ascetics. 
Born from the waters, they have a name formed from ap (water) and 
sara^ whose root is sri, meaning "to run" (here is the sense of "to 
glide" or "to flow"). We should also remember the ancient licentious 
Syrian festival of the Waters, Maitumas, where women showed 
themselves naked in the water, thus provoking rapture in the 
participants. It is best to keep in mind this particular point, which is 
not highlighted by the writer we have just quoted; his interpretation 
is. however, quite suitable in other respects, provided that, for the 
moment, we leave aside what he has written about the magical and no 
longer merely inner aspect of the orgiastic experience (we shall say 
something about this other aspect later on): "Directly linked to the 
beliefs in cyclic regeneration, which is represented in the agrarian 
ceremonial, are numerous rituals in the orgy, in the dazzling re- 
creation of the primordial chaos, in the reintegration of the 
undifferentiated unity of times before the creation.'* Eliade 80 wrote, 
"Like the immersion in the waters, the orgy annuls the creation and, 
at the same time, regenerates it; by identifying himself with the 
undifferentiated, precosmic totality, man hopes to return to himself 
restored and renewed; in a word, he hopes to become a "new man." 

In the significance of a cosmic-pantheistic opening that the orgy 
may cause the individual to experience, we may see again the positive 
and negative ambivalence of eros. In fact, such experiences are found 
in the ecstatic liberations proper to the mysteries of Woman and the 
Mother, to which we can oppose the purpose of the initiatic ceremo- 
nies celebrated under the Uranus-virile sign. The contact with the 
Waters or with the formless can have a dual outcome if we consider 
correctly the supernatural nucleus of the personality; it may equally 
loosen or dissolve that nucleus. This was seen to a certain extent by 
Eliadc when he recalled the saying of Heraclitus (fr . 68), "For souls it 
is death to become water," which corresponds to an Orphic 
fragment, "For the soul, water is death" (Clem., VI, II, 17, I). 82 
These sayings are justified in relation to the solar ideal, to the "dry 
way" of Uranian liberation and the absolute detachment from the 
cycle of generation, whose substance and nourishment are the wet 
principle in ihe special aspect of I he symbolism we have already 
discussed. 1'or I his reason, traditions have different ialcd ihe 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



105 



symbolism of the Waters: The lower Waters have been set against the 
upper Waters. This theme appears in the Bible itself, and Giordano 
Bruno said, "There are two kinds of waters; the lower waters below 
the firmament which blind men, and the upper waters above the 
firmament which enlighten." 83 We shall not state our opinion 
regarding this point, but restrict ourselves to confirming in the orgy 
an intermediate form, which allows the removal of individual 
conditional qualities and the appearance of the transcendental 
moment within a holy background, the same twofold aspect found in 
human love. 



Appendix 

Marquis de Sade and the "Way of ihe Left Hand" 

In speaking of sadism, we made the distinction between deviant 
sadism, a need in some neurotic or tainted individuals for cruelty as a 
special psychic aphrodisiac necessary to attain sexual satisfaction, 
and sadism understood as a natural element in eros that can be 
specially aroused so as to take the possibilities beyond the usual 
limits. 

However, we must make two other distinctions. First, it is neces- 
sary to distinguish between sadism with a sexual background and 
sadism in the broad sense wherein the link with sex and woman may 
be absent or only figure in a subordinate way, and the essence of 
which is pleasure through cruelty, evil, and destruction per se in 
every form. The genetic deduction of this second type of sadism from 
the first, a natural sexual element, is in vogue in some psychologies 
and above all in psychoanalysis but must be deemed absolutely 
without foundation. Moreover, sadism in the general sense is part of 
a bigger and more important category that embraces phenomena that 
arc quite complex and must be defined, ultimately, with an 
elementary existential orientation. However, to clarify this point we 
must make yet another distinction: we must oppose those 
experiences that, however liminal and problematic, still retain a 
genuine character, to the artificiality that marks what we call 
perversion. It is perversion when one feels pleasure in carrying out 
acts simply because they are forbidden or because, according to a 
given code of ethics, they are deemed to be "evil" or "sinful." Sadism 
can have this hue. Baudelaire's words express this attitude: "The 
unique and supreme sensual pleasure of love consists in the certainty 
o( doing evil; and man and woman have known since the time of their 
birth dial all sensual pleasure arises from evil."* 4 Everything 
"depraved" thai is displayed by so railed ninclecnlh-ceiiUiry 



*. 



106 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



107 



decadents (Byron in part, then Baudelaire, Barbey d'Aurevilly, 
Oscar Wilde, Villier de risle-Adam, Swinburne, Mirbeau, etc.) has 
this artificial character; it is merely literature and intellectuality. 
They are almost like children, who feel pleasure in doing something 
only because it represents the "forbidden" and because the act has 
the character of a transgression. However, this behavior may be an 
aphrodisiac for some people, and Anatole France* referring to a 
similar order of ideas, was right when he said, "By considering it a 
sin, Christianity has done a lot for love." The blasphemous scenario 
of the black Mass and Satanism, as a minute public has come to know 
it through works such as those of Huysmans, is part of this picture. It 
is indeed the picture of decadence. We must now determine, at this 
level, sadism taken in the general sense mentioned earlier. For this 
purpose we shall refer precisely to the man who gave his name to this 
tendency, namely the "divine Marquis," Alphonse Francois de Sade 
(1740 - 1814). 

In considering this personality , more than one trait may cause us to 
think that his sadism had mainly the character of a simple intellectual 
perversion. It is true that, notwithstanding his social position de 
Sade more than once submitted to the severity of the law and was 
compelled to leave France for a certain time, but what could be im- 
puted to him was very far from all the dreadful things described in his 
books. Furthermore, though living through the Reign of Terror of 
the French Revolution, he in no way took advantage of the outstand- 
ing chances that such a time offered to a person greedy for blood and 
cruelty; on the contrary, he exposed himself to serious risks so as to 
save some friends and his own in-laws from the guillotine. The two 
main loves in his life were wholly normal: his wife > from whom he be- 
came separated (but not because of sadistic abuses), and, thereafter, 
his wife's sister, with whom he then lived. His ''sadism," therefore, 
was essentially cerebral or, rather, imaginary: he limited himself to 
the stories in the works he wrote, as if for mental compensation, in 
his solitary life in prison and in the asylum of Charenton, where 
Bonaparte is said to have incarcerated him, although he was basically 
of sound mind, not for actual acts of cruel perversity but because 
Bonaparte would not forgive him for certain slanderous allusions he 
made in one of his pamphlets. There were many women who loved 
him and tried to persuade Napoleon to free "the poor Marquis." 8S 

Even an analysis of de Sade's works does not provide a background 
that is wholly of one character. French writers who have recently re- 
evaluated his works have tended to see him, above all, as the 
champion of the ''natural man" or "real man," that is, of the man who 
in spite of every! hi ng shows what he is really like in the wholeness of 
his instincts; this picture puis him on a rather insipid plane. 



i 



Moreover, there are signs in him of strange moralizing residues. It is 
not explained, for example, how de Sade could more than once have 
used the word "infamy" to describe the wicked actions committed by 
one or another of his characters. Then, if we read that romanticized 
account of things that actually happened. La Marquise de Gangs, not 
only do we find a description of the sacrament of confession and of 
penitence which is worthy of inclusion in a religious handbook, but 
we also witness a moralism that goes so far as to falsify the truth of the 
facts by stating that one of the guilty persons was struck by divine 
punishment, whereas in fact, that very same person actually escaped 
justice and lived happily until he died. 

Therefore, we must, in a way> "isolate" a given line of thought in 
de Sade*s writings if we wish to obtain a general view of life useful as a 
philosophical basis and justification for "sadism." The question here 
is the idea that the predominant force in the world is that of "evil," of 
destruction and of misdeeds. Dc Sade admits that a God exists who is 
the creator and ruler of the world, but he is a wicked God, a God who 
has "evil" for his essence and takes pleasure in villainy, misdeeds, 
and destruction, which he uses as essential elements for his 
designs. S6 Therefore, the excess of the negative over the positive 
would seem to be the law of reality; nature shows us that she only 
creates so as to destroy and that destruction is the first of her laws. 8 ' 
But as soon as this is recognized, an inversion of all values follows; 
the negative, and destructive element must have as much value as the 
positive element, for it conforms not only to nature but also to the 
divine will and to universal order (or, rather, to disorder); and he 
who instead follows the path of virtue, harmony, and good should be 
considered on the side of God's foes. 

Another logical consequence is that, by conforming to the pre- 
dominant cosmic forces, vice and misdeeds will always be victorious, 
happy, rewarded, and sublime, whereas virtue will always be frus- 
trated, punished, wretched, and marked by a fundamental 
impotence. 88 To this is added the sadistic theme in an actual sense, 
the sensual pleasure and ecstasy linked to destruction, cruelty, and 
violation. "To doubt that man's greatest happiness on earth is 
irrevocably linked to misdeeds is, in truth, just like doubting that the 
sun is the prime cause of growth," wrote de Sade; 89 and he added, 
"Oh, what a voluptuous act is the act of destruction. There is no 
ecstasy like that which one savors when giving way to this divine 
infamy!" 90 The pleasure in a destructive act intended to violate the 
very laws of cosmic nature 91 is linked to and foreshadows the theory 
of the superman. "We are gods," exclaimed one of the characters in 
his ton Kin ces. 

II si 1 1 unions »f sexual sadism predominate in his works., such 



108 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



109 



sadism becomes ideally a mere episode compared with this general 
concept, which seems to be a deviation only if it is considered on its 
own and which ceases to be so if it is stripped of its perverse ornamen- 
tation and related to a broader horizon. The perverse side in de Sade 
lies in everything that is pleasure because of transgression or evil as 
such; and that implies, among other things, an open contradiction, if 
we examine the central idea of his philosophy. In fact, speaking 
about and feeling certain acts to be evil and transgressions have 
meaning only if we presuppose a positive order and a recognized law, 
whereas, as we have seen, such an order and law have no existence in 
de Sade's opinion insofar as evil constitutes the essence of God and 
nature. And so what Praz 92 noted in this respect is right, namely that, 
wishing to enjoy the pleasure of transgressing and doing violence to 
that which exists, the sadist's only possible choice is to practice 
goodness and virtue precisely because they signify antinature and 
anti-God, rebellion and violence against which, according to de 
Sade's premise, should constitute the final end of creation, namely 
wickedness. In fact, all Satanism, as such, presupposes an intimate, 
unconscious acknowledgement of the sac redness and law that it 
violates; and therefore it can be sadism only in a very refined sense, 
like the pleasure in violating, by acting in a given way, something 
that in one's own conscience one would oppose. There is an essential 
difference between carrying out an act because it is deemed to be evil 
or a sin (just as other persons, for the same reason, would instead not 
carry it out) and carrying it out because it is not felt to be evil or a sin. 
He who acts positively and not polemically would never speak about 
"evil" or "sin" or transgression; he could not find within himself any 
point of reference to give meaning to such words. Only a person who 
identifies himself with one of the forces working in the world could 
speak of those things. 93 

We should indicate at this stage the possibility of rather diverse 
horizons for experiences of this kind, and we shall do this by taking 
up again what we mentioned about the metaphysics of pain, De Sade 
was not the first person to emphasize the meaning and extent of the 
destructive element in the world. His ideas have a specific character 
only because he obtains the basis for a sort of counterreligion from 
the destructive element, and because of his one-sidedness and 
"perversity," In a complete concept three aspects are distinguished 
and confirmed in creation: the power that creates, ihe power that 
preserves, and the power that destroys, and these three correspond to 
the well-known Hindu triad, Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. In 
abstract theological terms, the same division into three is found in the 
Western idea of the Divinity in his threefold function of creating, 
preserving, and hiking hnilUo himself wkii ho has created. Hui from 



/ 



a certain aspect or rather from the dynamic and immanent side the 
"taking back to himself 1 can also be equivalent to destroying, to 
Shiva's function, if we recognize in the Divinity the infinite, that 
which in its essence transcends all form, all law, and all finiteness. On 
this basis is defined the so-called "Way of the Left Hand/' the 
Tantric vamachara 94 Both the western p re-Orphic worship of 
Dionysus and the religion of Zagreus as the "Great Hunter who 
overthrows everything," and the Eastern worship of Shiva and Kali, 
Durga, and other "fearful" divinities, are equally characterized by 
the acknowledgement and glorification of destruction, violation, and 
incitement: they admit expression of a liberating frenzy, very often 
strictly linked to orgiastic experience in a ritual, sacrificial, and 
transfiguring framework, without connotation of sacrilege as in de 
Sade. 

In the Bhagavad-Gita, the background of the Way of the Left 
Hand is given in strictly metaphysical and theological terms. It tells 
us that the Divinity in his supreme form (in the "universal form" th*,t 
is revealed for an instant to the warrior Arjuna as a special privilege) 
can only be the infinite, and that the infinite can only represent the 
crisis, the destruction, and the breaking of everything that has a 
finite j conditioned j mortal character , rather like a voltage that is too 
high and burns out the circuit through which it passes. At this level, 
time, understood as the force that alters and destroys, is said to 
embody in a certain way this transcendent aspect of the divinity. The 
outcome, therefore, is that just at the moment of every destructive 
crisis the supreme reality can appear, the terrifying greatness which 
transcends all manifestation. The Bhagavad-Gita adopts this view 
not to justify evil or perversity, but 10 metaphysically sanction 
warlike heroism against humanitarianism and sentimentality- God 
himself exhorts the warrior Arjuna not to hesitate to fight and strike. 
| "He whom thou will slay," he said, "is already slain in me; be thou 
only the instrument, " 9S In his heroic onslaught, which takes no 
account of his own life or that of others, and which shows faithfulness 
to his own nature as a son of the warrior cast, Arjuna will reflect the 
awful and majestic power of the transcendent which breaks and 
overwhelms everything, thus foreshadowing absolute freedom. 96 In 
view of this and the existence of a corresponding and well- confirmed 
tradition, we included among Plato's divine forms oi intoxication or 
mania, this form, not considered by him, which is based in a real 
sense on warrior heroism. Lastly, we believe that this state of active 
and transfiguring exaltation lived and shone, even at the highest 
moments of the sacrificial experience, in those performing bloody 
sacrifices, especially if they were done under the sign of 'Tearful" 
divinities or aspects ol "divinity, such as those mentioned before. 



r; 



110 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



111 



A last echo of this tradition is found in Novalis* We said earlier that 
Novalis had perceived the phenomena of transcendence hidden in 
suffering and even illness. According to Novalis it is with "evil" that 
freedom and the free will make their appearance in nature. "When 
man wanted to become God, he sinned/' The cause of frailty, incon- 
stancy, and death itself should be seen in the fact that the soul, 
though linked to nature, is yet "beyond nature," like a transcending, 
exhausting force that removes all conditional qualities. Such "nega- 
tive" phenomena, therefore, do not confirm the power of nature over 
the soul but rather that of the soul over nature. "The process of 
history is a consuming fire," said Novalis, "and death may even 
represent the positive limit of this transcendence of a life beyond 
life." 97 The following words of Schegel can also be quoted; "Only in 
the enthusiasm of destroying is the sense of the divine creation 
revealed. Only in the middle of death does everlasting life shine*" 98 

These references are not free of obscurities and show in Novalis 
The lack of a connection with any tradition along the lines of the Way 
of the Left Hand; therefore, his work remains at a level of philoso- 
phical intuition without any practical counterpart. In the "divine 
Marquis" de Sade, nothing any longer is divine, and the far-off 
reflections of such a dangerous knowledge seem highly distorted and 
Satanized, Even where he seems to have perceived the destruction of 
every limit, he is exalting only a kind of dim worship of the Superman 
without any light: modern commentators such as G. Bataille and 
Maurice Blanchot have written about a "supreme solitude" when dc 
Sade's man inexorably precipitates a climax of violence and 
destruction. However, this does not annul the connection that de 
Sade establishes between the mysticism of negation and destruction 
and the realm of sex. 

As the point of view r mainly followed in this present study is that of 
the Way of the Left Hand, it is worth adding some further informa- 
tion regarding its cosmological background in Hindu tradition. Its 
starting point consists of the doctrine concerning the cyclic develop- 
ment of manifestation, and that development should comprise two 
essential phases or aspects, pravritti-marga and nivritti-marga . In the 
first phase the absolute soul is defined, perfected, and bound to 
forms and delimitations ("name and form," nama-mpa) which are 
Ivisible in all the objects and beings that surround us. This process 
^develops to a given limit, beyond which the direction is reversed and 
enters the second phase, the nwritti-marga, meaning a return, a 
revulsion from everything that is finished, formed, and manifested, 
and a breaking of the identification of the soul with the process 
belonging lo die previous phase/' 1 ' 

Brahma, imdei stood as the god who croaks, and Vishnu, I lit* goo! 



L 



who preserves, reign in the pravritti-marga , while Shiva reigns in the 
nwritli-marga. The Way of the Right Hand (dakshinachara) is linked 
to the first phase, and the Way of the Left Hand (vamachara) to the 
second phase. Specific laws, rules, and cults correspond to the 
creative, positive, and preserving aspect of manifestation; the ethics 
of faithfulness to one's own nature (svadharma) belong to this aspect. 
In the second phase, the way is inverted; it is estrangement and 
revulsion from the first phase. This estrangement can take two 
forms: one ascetic and the other destructive and disintegrating, The 
second characterizes the vamachara, the Way of the Left Hand, and 
is linked to the Tantric practices of the "secret ritual" (the 
Panchatanva). The ascetic form is eminently represented by the 
lay a yoga or yoga of disintegrations. The term vama (meaning 
"left 1 ') in vamachara is also explained by some texts as meaning 
"contrary"; it means the opposition to everything that belongs to 
pravritti-marga y to the creative and preserving aspects of 
manifestation, and therefore it is an attitude not only of estrangement 
but also of disdain for every law and rule. These ethics of antinomy 
are proper to one who place himself under the sign of nwritti-marga . 
Technically, "the method indicated by the masters [of this Way] is to 
employ the forces of pravrilti [the forces proper to the positive and 
binding phase of manifestation] in such a way as to make them self- 
disintegrating >" 100 The siddha or adept in this path disregards law 
and is called svechchhachari^ or "he who can do everything he wants." 

Another agreed interpretation of vama, or "left," is "woman," and 
this takes us back in particular to the part which the role of woman 
and the orgy (the Tannic Panchatanva includes the use of woman 
and intoxicating drinks) in the W T ay of the Left Hand. This way is 
considered as synonymous with lata-sadkana, an expression which 
includes an allusion to the special posture that the woman assumes in 
magical coitus within these Hindu circles. 101 

It is natural that the followers of each of the two ways should praise 
the one they have chosen and condemn the other. For ins tan ce, the 
Tantras says that the difference between the Way of the Left Hand 
and the Way of the Right Hand is the same as that between wine and 
milk. 102 But the two ways are deemed to be two different methods for 
attaining one single purpose. Thus it must be determined, case by 
case, which of the two ways is best fitted for the tendencies in the 
basic nature of each person. In this respect Woodroffe noted rightly 
l hat instead of "evil," each person should talk of "what is not suitable 
for me," and instead of "good," we should say, "what is best fitted to 
inc"; and thai agrees wiih I he ancient saying "Non licet omnibus 
( lithcratn fidirv %% (Noi everyone is allowed to approach ( alhera). 

1 ,;isc, it is best lo emphasize I hat the Way of the Left [land may 



112 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Phenomena of Transcendency in Profane Love 



113 



also exist on the general plane indicated by the Bhagavad-Gita, which 
speaks, for instance, of the way proper to a warrior without sexual or 
orgiastic meanings of any kind. In the Bhagavad-Gita, this way is 
held to be equal, in its highest purpose, to that of faithfulness to one's 
proper mode of being and of turning existence into a ritual or sacred 
observance (the corresponding formula is tatmadarpanamkurushva), 
that is, faithfulness to the dakshhiachara^ the Way of the Right Hand. 

Rasputin and the Sect of the Kklysti 

With relation to what we said in the last section of this chapter, it may 
be interesting to cite orgiastic facts wherein are gathered together in a 
strange manner various factors of erotic transcendence, which we ex- 
amined in detail when dealing with some liminal forms of profane 
sexual love. These are rites performed by the Russian sect of the 
Khiysti, who had to keep them strictly secret. The rules and ideas of 
this sect could not be revealed to any outsider, not even to close 
relatives; outwardly the Khiysti kept the Orthodox faith, but 
inwardly they deemed it a "false belief/' 

We ought to begin by saying riiat the practices of the Khiysti 
appear highly spurious and hybrid. The rites preserve, in degraded, 
uncouth, popular forms, the remains of pre-Christian orgiastic 
ceremonies that have lost their original, authentic background and 
instead include some themes of the new faith in a paradoxical 
manner. The dogmatic premise of the sect is that man is potentially 
God. By developing awareness of this, he can be God in fact, taking 
to himself the nature of Christ (whence comes the name of the sect) if 
he is a man, or that of the Virgin if a woman, through the 
transfiguring descent of the Holy Ghost, provoked by celebration of 
a secret midnight rite. The participants, both men and women, wear 
only a white garment over complete ritual nakedness. While 
pronouncing in vo cations , they begin dancing in a circle. The men 
form a circle in the middle that moves quickly in the direction of the 
path of the sun, while the women form an outer circle at first and 
move in the opposite direction to the path of the sun (a ritual 
reference to the cosmic polarity observed by the sexes). The motion 
becomes more and more wild and giddy until some of the 
participants leave the circles and begin dancing alone, like the 
ancient vertiginatores and Arab dervishes, so fast, it is said, that 
sometimes their figures can no longer be picked out as they fall and 
rise again (the dance as a technique of ecstasy). Their frenzy becomes 
contagious. To increase their exaltation, the men and women, whip 
each other (pain being an erotic and ecstatic factor). At the peak of 
this exaltation, the inner transformation, the immanent, invoked 
descent of the I loly Spirit begins to he foreshadowed. At this point. 



i 



both men and women strip off their white ritua! garments and 
copulate promiscuously; the drive of the sexual experience and the 
trauma of coitus bring the rite to its most extreme intensity. 103 

A young woman is chosen on each occasion as the "personification 
of the divinity and, at the same time, the symbol of generative 
power"; she is worshipped both as Mother Earth and as the Holy 
Virgin of Christianity. She appears wholly naked at the end of the 
secret rite and hands dried grapes to the faithful as a sacrament. 104 
This detail establishes a link to the ancient orgiastic rites that were 
celebrated under the sign of the mysteries of the Great Chthonic 
Goddess and of the "naked Goddess." 

It is interesting to observe that in this sect sex is severely restricted 
to this ritual and ecstatic use; in every other respect the sect professes 
rigid asceticism and condemns carnal love and even marriage itself. It 
is remarkably similar to another Slav sect, that of the Skoptzi, in 
which asceticism is so extreme as to prescribe the castration of men 
and woman. A young naked woman also appears in the rites of the 
Skoptzi as the central figure. This is more likely an echo of the cult 
belonging to another form of the mysteries of the Great Goddess, the 
Phrygian Cybele, whose worship was often linked to similar mutila- 
tions carried out during ecstatic frenzy. 

The starctz Grigori Efimovich, also called Rasputin, belonged to 
the sect of the Khiysti. Various traces of mystic orgies are also pre- 
served in this personage, who has been talked about so much. To 
start with, it is meaningful that the title staretz, old saint, should be 
coupled with the name Rasputin, derived from rasputnik or w disso- 
lute," It is hard to distinguish between the truth and the legends 
invented by both his admirers and his foes. The presence of certain 
extranormal powers in this uncouth Siberian peasant, however, is 
undeniable* His end amply demonstrates this; strong doses of a 
powerful poison, possibly cyanide, had no effect on him, and he 
stood up after being hit by revolver bullets fired from a close range, 
so that in the end he had to be slaughtered. The "religion of 
Rasputin" w T as essentially marked with the motif indicated above. 
His own words were "I have come to bring you the voice of our holy 
Mother Earth and to teach you the blessed secret which she passed on 
to me about sanctification by sin"; 103 and in this, in fact, we can see 
the subject of the Great Goddess (Mother Earth) returning in a 
hybrid form combined with the Christian concept of the sinfulness of 
the flesh. In its essence, the unbridled experience of sex, the 
"mixture of sin" and the so-called svalnyi greek, was conceived as a 
means of "mortification" capable of causing a "mystic death," 
abolishing the impurity of coitus and producing a "wonderful 
I tanslni million" in ihe individual. 10 '' At such a level, coitus became a 



114 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



kind of transforming sacrament and method of participation. In 
objective terms free of moral tones, the "sanctifkation through sin" 
announced by Rasputin is connected to this meaning. Instead, as 
regards its moral and Christian interpretation, we refer to the 
Lutheran "sin manfully" and to the idea, professed by Saint 
Augustine, that virtue can be sin when marked with the boastful 
pride of the fallen creature. 107 In such a context, to yield to the flesh 
in a way of humiliating oneself, of destroying the pride of the ego, 
that "obscure despot," even in its final remains, which indeed consist 
of pride in its own virtue. In existential and not moral terms, the 
pride to be humiliated by giving free rein to sex and not resisting it, 
by "sinning," is connected to the limitation of the finite individual, 
which has to be violated by means of a special paroxysmal experience 

oferos* 

Rasputin, both personally and in his behavior, was repulsive 
rather than attractive; an influence of a different category, at least 
partly connected to the experience of the Khlysti and most likely also 
based on his exceptional inclinations, constituted the foundations of 
his power and fascination; these he exercised even in the circles of the 
high Russian aristocracy, which were otherwise not open to a dirty, 
primitive peasant. Rasputin was, to some extent, attached to the 
techniques of the Khlysti and often made use of the dance, which he 
considered a buildup to coitus; he had a prediction for gypsy music, 
which, when genuine, is one of the few types that still retain a 
frentic and elemental dimension. It is said that the women whom 
Rasputin chose to dance with "had the feeling that they were taking 
part in the mystic influence of which the staretz had often spoken," 
As the rhythm became more and more frenetic, it could be seen how 
"the face of the woman dancing lit up, how her glances little by little 
became veiled, her eyelids grew heavy and, in the end, closed." The 
staretz then carried away the almost unconscious woman to copulate 
with her. In most cases, the memory that the woman retained of what 
had happened was one of almost mystical ecstasy. However, there 
were also those who brought back an impression of deep horror, and 
there was even one case of semimadness as an outcome. 108 On the 
basis of what we have already said, however, this double effect seem 
quite natural. 



4 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



Mythology, Ontology, and Psychology 

In traditional teachings, the theme of an original duality relates to the 
polarity of the sexes and recurs almost everywhere. This duality is ex- 
pressed sometimes in purely metaphysical terms, at other times as 
the duality of divine and mythological figures, cosmic elements, 
principles, gods and goddesses. 

Scholars of the history of religions have tended to see this as 
, anthropomorphism; having created the gods in his own image, man 
also transposed and projected into them sexual differentiation. This 
interpretation sees all those divine dyads and dichotomies as merely 
the products of a fantasy that has the human experience of sex as its 
one and only definite content. 

But the truth is exactly the contrary. Traditional man sought to 
find the secret and essence of sex in divinity itself. In his eyes, before 
physical embodiment, the sexes existed as superindividual forces and 
transcendental principles; before appearing in "nature," they existed 
in the realm of the sacred, the cosmic, and the spiritual. And in the 
manifold variety of divine figures differentiated as gods and god- 
desses, man sought to understand the essence of the eternal male and 
eternal female which the sexual natures of human beings reflect and 
manifest. This necessitates a reversal of the view of religious histori- 
ans we mentioned before; instead of human sex being the foundation 
for the understanding of the reality of sexually differentiated divine 
and mythological figures, it is precisely the content of those figures 
(hat will give us the key to the deepest and most universal aspects of 
sex in man and woman* Only these divinities, the creations of a far- 
sighted intuition and even of effective individual or collective super- 
sensual perception, can give us the meaning of what we earlier called 
absolute manhood and absolute womanhood in their fundamental 
aspects. They can also lead us to recognize and distinguish certain 
objective "constants" in the derived and hybrid forms in which sex 
appears in empirical individuals and in variations that depend on 
different races and civilizations. In particular, the bases for a study of 
the character and psychology of sex which is truly intended to plumb 
l he depth of this subject can he drawn from sacred sexual beliefs and 
I he mythology of sex- ll cannot be overlooked even il the material we 



116 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



117 



-, i 



examine will contain some abstruse and novel aspects for the 
contemporary reader. 

As a premise, we should emphasize that our traditional viewpoint 
is opposed to the naturalistic interpretations we cited and also quite 
different from recent psychoanalytical trends. Earlier, we said that 
the principles of absolute manhood and womanhood are not con- 
cepts, abstract and devoid of reality in themselves, though useful as 
standards for studying the mixed and partial empirical forms of sex; 
nor do we consider them as being at the level of simple "ideals" or 
"ideal types" which exist only because they are realized approxi- 
mately in a given being. Instead, they arc real principles in the 
mean ing o f the Greek word ark ha i — ' 'beings," pr i nc i pie s-po we rs o f 
a transindividual order that variously condition thai by which every 
man is man and every woman is woman; they existed before and 
beyond the sphere of every mortal man and woman and beyond their 
fleeting individuality; such principles have a metaphysical existence. 
This concept has been expressed in an especially meaningful way by 
the Tantric and sahajiya schools, which have recognized in the 
division of creatures into male and female, a strictly ontological 
character, which springs from the metaphysical nature of the 
principles called Shiva and Shakti or of the mythological 
personifications such as Krishna and Radha. 

We can therefore apply to this special realm the Platonic doctrine 
of ideas itself interpreted in a realistic and magical sense, namely the 
concept of the "idea' 1 or "archetype* 5 understood not as a conceptual 
abstract in the mind but as a root of the real and pf reality of a higher 
category. The forces we are talking about are present invisibly in all 
the individual beings which they enfold and through whom they are 
manifested; these gods or beings of sex live and appear in various 
ways, in different degrees of intensity, in the multitude of men and 
women, in space and in time; and such manifold fleeting, 
approximate, and sometimes even larval forms do not touch the 
identity and eternity of those gods or beings* 

Therefore, the divergence seems quite clear between our view and 
these modern trends we mentioned, for the latter operate on a plane 
that is not metaphysical but psychological. Though Jung did not 
reduce the figures of the sexual myth to mere imagination and poetic 
invention and though he foresaw in them the dramatization of 
"archetypes" of universal character and independent reality, he also 
understood that reality in merely psychological terms and reduced it 
to mental projections of the collective unconscious and to "needs" 
that the obscure and atavistic part of man's psyche caused in prevail 
over I he conscious and personal part . In i his, nol only can we clearly 
see i! con ihs ion of 1 en us, hut through llie misapplied concept ol "llic 



i 



unconscious and the reliance on a phenomenology of psychopaths, 
the general modern tendency to refer everything back to merely 
human dimensions is reconfirmed. If every principle having a 
transcendent character must be reduced to "psychological fact" so as 
to be subject of experimentation, yet a fundamental difference exists 
between psychology as an end in itself, and, instead, understanding 
psychology in terms of ontology. In fact, all of Jung's interpretations 
end on a very banal plane, and his intuition of the super individual 
and everlasting reality of the sexual "archetypes" is rendered useless 
or degraded beause of the distortion of his professional mentality and 
the lack of suitable doctrinal points of reference. 

The divergence of the two points of view can be seen even more 
readily at the level of the practical consequences. Jung had in view 
the treatment of neuropathic patients and seriously believed that the 
purpose of ancient religions, mysteries, and initiatic ceremonies was 
no different from his own: to heal individuals suffering from psychic 
conflicts and not in harmony with the unconscious part of their 
being. In the end, for him it was a question of "de saturating" the 
archetypes and ridding them of the mythical and fascinating 
dignity — of the matta — which imparts to them an obsessive 
character, and of reducing them to normal psychic functions, this too 
in the case of the male and the female archetypes as they surface here 
and there in ordinary consciousness. 1 In contrast, the knowledge of 
the metaphysical reality of the sexual archetypes traditionally served 
as a positive premise for the sacred rites of sex. These practices and 
rites were not intended to restore a divided being struggling with his 
"complexes" to a banal normal state, but to propitiate a system of 
evocations and participations extending beyond the merely human 
and to open the ego proper to those "dignities" that Jung reduced to 
unexplainable halos of the images of the unconscious, 2 

It is important to add that traditionally there existed a system of 
relationships between reality and symbols and between actions and 
myths, such that the world of divine figures not only provided a way 
of penetrating the most profound dimensions of human sexuality but 
also contained linked able to supply governing principles of the 
necessary relations between man and woman. On that basis such 
relations acquired a profound significance and conformed to a law 
and standard higher than the world of unforeseeable happenings, 
free will, and merely individual situations. 

We shall consider this aspect of the metaphysics of sex briefly as 
well. 

The Metaphysical Dyad 

As regards dualities, let us first examine those which have an 



118 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



119 



abstract, metaphysical character that has not yet been affected by the 
creation of myths and symbols. 

The fundamental idea is that universal creation or manifestation 
takes place through a twofold condition of principles within the 
supreme unity, in the same way that animal procreation takes place 
through the union of the male and female. 

As regards procreation, Aristotle wrote, "The male represents the 
specific form; the female represents the matter, being passive insofar 
as she is female, whereas the male is active." 3 This polarity recurs in 
the concepts of ancient Greek philosophy, having its origin in the 
mysteries and being applied to various forms that nowadays are no 
longer understood in their original, living meaning. The male is 
form, the female is matter. "Form" here means the power that deter- 
mines and arouses the principle of motion, development, becoming. 
"Matter" means the material and instrumental cause of all develop- 
ment, the pure indeterminate capability, the substance or power 
that, being devoid of form in itself, can take up any form, and which 
in itself is nothing but can become everything when it has been 
awakened and fecundated. The Greek word for matter, ul£ y does not 
mean, therefore, either the matter of the organism or that of physical 
nature in general. It is hard for us to understand this term, but in the 
present context it is applied to a mysterious entity, obscure and 
unfathomable, which both has and does not have being, because it is 
the merely possible and therefore the power-substance of "nature" as 
change and becoming. In Pythagorean terms this is also the principle 
of the Dyad (of the binary, of the Two); it is opposed to the One and 
is presented by Plato as deuieron or that which is always the "other," 
being related to the receiving place, khom> of being and to the 
"mother" or "foster-mother" of becoming. 4 In general, this is how 
the eternal male and female are presented in their most abstract 
expression in traditional metaphysics. 

As a further determination, male and female can be made to cor- 
respond to being (in the highest sense) and to becoming; to that 
which has its own principle in itself, and to that which has a principle 
in another; to being (stability and unchangeableness) and to life 
(change, soul, or animating substance, maternal substance of 
becoming). In this respect Plotinus wrote of being, ousa or on, and of 
the female complement of the everlasting male busia; of everlasting 
being and everlasting power, which is in a certain way identified with 
"nature" and the "divine psyche" (the Psyche of Life or Zoe of Zeus). 
Being, in Plotinus, is also put into relation with the nous, another 
word that has become hard to understand properly nowadays; it is 
the intellcciual principle conceived as an Olympian principle, 
unchangeable presence and pure light , which in Plotinus also has the 



i 



figure of Logos when it is considered in the action with which it 
fecundates and moves matter or cosmic power. In contrast, the 
female is the life force; as Psyche, she is "the life of everlasting 
being," which, when manifestation "proceeds" from the One and 
takes form, she develops in time, in becoming, in circumstances 
where the two principles are joined together and variously mixed; the 
male or Logos keeps himself in everything which is, which remains 
the same as itself, which does not become, and which is the pure 
principle of form. 5 

The Hellenic terms, "nature" or physis has a meaning that itself 
diverges from the modern, materialistic meaning; it is a meaning, 
however, that must be held when the female principle is identified 
with the "natural" principle. In fact, the supernatural principle in 
traditional symbolism was always deemed to be "male," whereas the 
principle of nature and becoming was regarded as "female." This 
polarity is found in Aristotle too; opposite to the unmoving nous 
which is pure function, there stands "nature," in which the nous with 
its mere presence as "moving immobility" arouses the effective 
movement or passage from formless potentiality or "matter" to form 
or individual existence. This duality is equivalent to the dyad of Sky 
and Earth, the polarity of the uranic and the earthly and chthonic 
principles as cosmic-symbolic images of the eternal male and eternal 
female. 

Another symbol for the female, which we have already discussed, 
is that of the Waters. The Waters embody various meanings; first 
they represent the undifferentiated life prior to and not yet fixed in 
form; second, they symbolize that which runs or flows and is there- 
fore unstable and changeable, hence the principle of everything that 
submits to procreation and becoming in the unpredictable W'orld, 
which was called sublunar by the ancients; last, they also represent 
the principle of all fertility and growth according to the analogy of 
water's fertilizing action on earth and soil. On the one hand, we 
spoke of the "wet principle" of generation and, on the other hand, of 
the "waters of life" and also of the "divine waters," Let us add that 
the Waters were symbolically linked to the horizontal, which corre- 
sponds to the Aristotelean category of lying down or keistkai and is 
opposed to the symbol of the vertical, the category of "standing" or 
ekhein in the specific sense of standing up or standing straight; this 
association with the male principle was expressed in ancient times by 
the phallic and ithyphallic symbolism of the erect penis. 

Complementing the Waters as a female principle, the male princi- 
ple was ollen linked to Fire. However, always we must bear in mind 
i he poly valence oi 'traditional symbols* that is, their ability to sustain 
very dif leivnl meanings, which are not mutually exclusive bill follow 



120 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



121 



the logic of various perspectives. The male principle as Fire has many 
aspects (we may recall in Hindu tradition the double birth of Agni 
and in classical tradition the double nature of earthly and volcanic 
fire and of uranic or heavenly fire), but taken in its aspect of flame 
that heats and nourishes, fire was adopted as the symbol of the female 
element, and in this aspect played an important part in Indo-Euro- 
pean cults. Atar, the Greek Estia, and Roman Vesta are personifica- 
tions of flame in this sense. (Ovid [Fast, VI, 291] says, "Vesta is 
living flame.'*) The fire in household and public rites, the same holy 
everlasting fire that burned in the palace of the Caesars and was 
carried in official ceremonies, the fire that every Greek and Roman 
army carried with it and kept lit day and night was linked to the 
female aspect of the divine essence, understood as the life force or 
life-giving element. In this context there still exists the ancient idea 
that the sudden extinction of the household fire is a sign of death; not 
the "being," but the life fails. 

In Eastern traditions, we find confirmation of these symbolic 
aspects. Traditions of the Far East know the Sky-Earth dyad: the sky 
is identified with "active perfection" (ch'ien) and the Earth with 
"passive perfection" (k y un). In the "Great Treatise" 6 it is said, "The 
male acts according to the way of the creative, whereas the female 
operates according to the way of the receptive," and moreover/ 
"The creative acts in the great beginnings, while the receptive brings 
to fulfillment the things which have become. , . . The Earth is 
fecundated by the Sky and acts at the right time. ... By following 
the Sky it meets its lord and tbilows its own way in conformity with 
order." Just as in Pythagoreanism, the binary (the Two) is linked 
here to the female principle, and odd numbers are generally related 
to the Sky , while even numbers are linked to the Earth. Unity is the 
beginning; Two is the female number of the Earth; Three is a male 
number as it represents Unity, added to the Earth (1 plus 2 equals 3), 
and therefore represents everything that in the world of becoming 
carries the sign and the imprinted form of the higher principle, as in 
one of its images, 8 This numerical symbolism has a universal 
character. We also find it in the West as late as the Middle Ages and 
Dante. It is at the base of the ancient maxim "God rejoices in odd 
numbers" (because in every odd number, One once again prevails 
over Two). 

In traditions of the Far East, however, the metaphysical dyad is 
characterized by the yang and yin, which are understood as being 
elementary determinations and also real forces acting on every plane 
of being. When understood as determinations, yang has the nature of 
the Sky and everything active, positive, and male, whereas yin has ihe 
nature of I he Faith and everything passive, negative, and female. In 



L 



graphic symbolism a continuous line corresponds to yang , 

whereas a broken line corresponds to yin , indicating the idea of 

the "two" and, therefore, of the Platonic power of the "other." The 
trigrams and hexagrams formed with various combinations of those 
two elementary signs are given by the / Ching, the fundamental text 
of Chinese tradition, as the keys to the essential situations that reality 
may display in a spiritual or natural category of the universe, as well 
as in the human, individual, and collective sphere. All phenomena, 
forms, beings, and changes of the universe are considered at the level 
of various encounters and combinations of the yin and yang; from this 
they take their final characterization. From their dynamic aspect 
yang and yin are opposed but also complementary forces. The light 
and the sun have a yang quality , whereas shadow and the moon have a 
yin quality. Fire is yang, the waters are yin; mountain tops arejKMg, 
the plains are yin; the spirit is yang > the soul and vital force arejm; the 
pure is yang, the unfathomable yin; and so on. Lastly, it is the 
predominance at yin in woman and of yang in man that make them 
what they are: at this level the pure^iw and pure yang appear as the 
substances of absolute womanhood and absolute manhood 
respectively. Besides the aspects of symbolism that take us back to 
the other writers we have already examined in Hellenic tradition, it is 
worth noting Lit this stage the attribution of the cold, wet, and dark 
qualities to yin and of the dry, clear and light qualities to yang. The 
cold quality of yin might seem a contradiction of the aspects of heat, 
flame, and life already examined in the female principle, but it 
should be interpreted in the same context as the cold light of the 
moon and the coldness of goddesses like Diana who personify the 
principle of that light; and we can see the importance of this passage 
in the study of the feminine character and of woman. To I he yin, 
therefore, belong shadows and the darkness with regard to 
elementary powers prior to form, which correspond in the human 
being to the unconscious and to the vital, nocturnal part of his 
psyche. That takes us directly back to the relationship that was 
acknowledged to exist between female divinities and divinities of the 
night and of the depths of the earth, the night of Hesiod, presented as 
the mother of the day. Here the day is equivalent to the clear, light 
("sunny") quality of the yang, which is the very quality proper to 
manifested, definite, and completed forms that are released from the 
equivocal darkness and from the indeterminate nature of the 
generative womb and female substance or raw material. 

We find in Hindu tradition some noteworthy details of the symbo- 
lism with which we are dealing. The Samkhya system provides us 
with the basic theme in ihe dual nature of f>untsha, the primordial 
male, and uI'/vviAt///, the principle ol the primordial "nature," sub- 



122 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gads and Goddesses, Men and Women 



123 



stance, or energy of all becoming and all motion. Purusha has the same 
detached, unalterable, "Olympian" character as pure light — being 
nonactive in the same sense as the immobile mover of Aristotle — of 
the Hellenic nous. It is with a kind of action of presence — with a 
"reflex" of itself— that it fecundates prakriti and that it breaks the 
equilibrium of prakntfs powers {gima) and makes way for the 
manifested world. But it is in metaphysical and speculative Tantrism 
that such a concept has had its most interesting developments. That 
Hindu cult knew the figure of Shiva as a hermaphroditic god, 
Ardhanarishvara. In the Tantras the male and female of the divinity 

! separate. Shiva corresponds here properly to the purusha of the 
Samkhya, while Shakti, understood as his wife and power, 
corresponds to prakriti or "nature" j the Sanskrit word shakti means 
both "wife" and "power." From their coitus springs the world; the 
formula of the texts is precisely, "Skma-Shakti-samayogat jayate 
shrishtikalpara" 9 Just as in the Samkhya, a nonacting originating 
function is attributed to the male, to Shiva; he determines motion 
and awakens Shakti; only the latter, however, truly acts, moves, and 
generates. This is shown by the symbolism of a sexual union in which 
the female, Shakti, made of flames, undertakes the active part and 
moves, embracing the divine male, made of light and bearer of the 
scepter, who, instead, stays still. This is the so-called viparita- 
maithuna, the inverted coitus, found so often in the holy iconography 
of India and Tibet, especially in the so-called yab-yum chudpa 
statuettes. 10 In the field of divine personifications, the Shakti 
corresponds, among other things, to Kali, the "black goddess," who 
is also represented, however, as made of flames or surrounded with a 
halo of flame, joining in herself two attributes we have already 
examined in the female archetype, namely the darkness prior to 
form, and fire. In her Kali aspect, however, Shakti is mainly shown 
as energy that cannot be reduced to any finite form or limit and thus 
also as a destructive goddess. 1 ' Otherwise, just as the Chinese sec the 
varied interaction ofyin imdyang united together and manifesting in 
reality, so the Hindu tradition sees in creation a varied combination 
of energies springing from the two principles of chiP-shakti or shiva- 
skakti and of maya-skakti. Thus in one text the goddess says, "Shiva 
and Shakti being at one and the same time everything in the universe, 
you or Maheshvara [the male god] are in every place and I am in every 
place. You are in everything and I am in everything." 12 To be more 

1 correct, Shiva is present in the unchangeable, conscious, spiritual, 
and stable aspect, while Shakti is present in the changeable, 
i unconscious- vital, natural, and dynamic aspect of everything I hat 
exists. 13 The goddess exists in the form of time, and in lluil form she 
is flic cause ol all change -and is "all-powerful in (he inomenl ol the 
dissolution ol ihe universe." 1 ' 



Lastly, Maya is connected in speculative Tantrism to the female, 
Shakti. This well-known word is its most common acceptance and 
especially in the Vedanta is linked to the illusory and unreal nature of 
the visible world such as it appears in its condition of duality. 
However, it is also used to designate the works of magic, and the link 
cited above (maya-skakti) is correctly understood as representing the 
female as the "magic of the divine," the goddess as the magical 
generator of manifested forms, which are illusory only in a relative 
sense; for in the Hindu tradition the attribute of real can only be 
applied to absolute, bright, everlasting being that is devoid of 
becoming and of "sleep." In a subordinate way, however, there arises 
from that a connection between the female principle and the 
"nocturnal" world which constitutes the groundwork of a special 
kind of magic, enchantment, or fascination. This motif can also be 
found in one aspect of the Pelasgian and Greek Hecate, the goddess 
belonging sometimes to the underworld and sometimes to the moon, 
who imparted power to incantations and taught the art of magical 
spells to the witches and sorceresses who were under her protection 
or her actual priestesses (according to one tradition, Medea was a 
priestess in a temple of Hecate). Diana, too, like Hecate, with whom 
she was often identified, was said to preside over magical arts; the 
Hamilton vases show figures of women busy with incantations that 
are addressed to her. "Enchantress of the foe of the god of love" is one 
attribute of the Great Goddess of the Hindus. 

In the context of the same Hindu doctrines belongs the concept of 
manifestation as a "look outward," bahirmukhi, namely as an out- 
ward motion or tendency, as a "going outside," a release from the 
One and from the Identical, this being another aspect of the nature 
and function of Shakti. Shakti is also called kamarupini or "she who is 
made of desire" and her sign is the female sexual organ, the upside- 
down triangle, which is identified with the sign of desire. This illus- 
trates the same motif; every desire involves a motion toward "other 
than oneself and toward something outside oneself. Now, 
Buddhism in particular has recognized desire and thirst, kama, 
trishna, and tonka, as the final basis of reality as becoming and of 
conditioned life, the samsara. In the "female of the divine," in the 
Shakti of Shiva, lies the root of desire, whether as cosmogonic desire 
or as that which is of the same substance as t he Waters and "matter." 
It must be understood as "privation" in Hellenic terms, like Plato's 
Pcnia, devoid of being and covetous of being, as opposed to the 
starry and motionless nature of metaphysical manhood and of the 
everlasting nous. On the other hand, it is said that Shiva without 
Khakii would be incapable of any motion and would be "inactive" 
just nsSlKikh or/vW-'n// without Shiva would be unconscious or tivkk, 
I ha I is, devoid o I (lie biij'.lu clcmcnl. The muled di vine couples of I lie 



i 



124 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



125 



Hindu or Indo-Tibetan pantheon are intended to show the constant 
link between the Shiva and Shakti elements in everything that is 
manifested. Plotinus (III, v, 8) wrote that gods are defined by nous, 
whereas goddesses are defined by the "psyche," and to every nous is 
joined a psyche, and the psyche of Zeus is Aphrodite, who, says 
Plotinus , is identified by priests and theologians with Hera as well. 

We shall not prolong this with similar references drawn from other 
traditions because they would add little to the basic structures we 
have just indicated. We shall only mention some ideas of the Jewish 
Kabbala and Christian gnosticism. In the former, the "female nature 
of the divinity," the nubkak opposed to duhrah, is generally repre- 
sented by the Shekhinah, a force or principle understood as "the wife 
of the King," and mention is made of the holy nuptials, zivugak kadi- 
skahy of the King and Queen, of God and his Shekhinah. 16 It is most 
important to note here this aspect of the essential female principle, 
the everlasting womanhood under whose protection all women in the 
world remain; 17 according to that aspect the female principle is 
displayed as an equivalent of the life-giving Holy Ghost or as a power, 
influence, or "glory" immanent in creation, that is, a power distinct 
from the pure transcendence of the Divine and even able to detach 
itself therefrom (as we shall see to be the case with the Hindu Shakti 
herself in the "descending phase of manifestation"). Therefore, the 
Kabbala also talks of the state of "exile" of the Shekhinah. But the 
Shekhinah as "glory present in this world" brings us to a further 
corrective- In fact, "glory" was understood in ancient times not as a 
personified abstraction but as a divine power, or the fire in the 
Iranian idea of hvareno. This idea is akin to that of the "living flame" 
personified as Vesta, which, through associations brought to light by 
Cumont, 18 takes us back again to the idea of a complementary female 
divinity and efficient power, such as Fortune, especially in the guise 
of FortunaRegia. 

In the Christian religion, which has accumulated and absorbed 
motifs taken from many heterogeneous traditions, the "Spirit" has 
no well-defined features; it is not female when it fecundates the 
Virgin or when it is a principle that stands above the Waters in the 
Old Testament. But in Hebrew and Aramaic the word "spirit" 
belongs to the feminine gender, and in Christian gnosticism, the 
"Gospel of the Hebrews," we meet the expression, which refers to 
Christ, "my mother, the Holy Ghost" or Holy Spirit. 19 The Greek 
word for spirit or ghost, pneuma, may correspond to the Hindu 
prana, or breath as vital force or life force; we can note that the 
descent of the Holy Ghost was represented as a descent of flames, a 
meaning that agrees with that of the Shekhinah itself. On the other 
hand, the dove was oil en used as a symbol of the Holy < J host , which 



L 



was already linked to the great goddesses of the Mediterranean 
world; the Cretan Potnia* Ishtar, Derceto, Mylitta, and Aphrodite. 20 
And indeed it is the doves that bring Zeus his food> ambrosia. 21 

The female divinity of gnosticism is Sophia, a being with many 
aspects and names. She is sometimes identified with the Holy Ghost 
itself but, according to her various capacities, is also the Universal 
Mother, the Mother of the Living or the Resplendent Mother, the 
Power on High, She-of-the-Left-Hand (as opposed to Christ, 
understood as her husband and He-of-the-Right-Hand), as the 
Luxurious One, the Womb, the Virgin, the Wife of the Male, the 
Revealer of Perfect Mysteries, the Saint Columba of the Spirit, the 
Heavenly Mother, the Wandering One or Elena (that is, Selene, the 
Moon). She was envisaged as the Psyche of the world and the female 
aspect of Logos. 22 In the "Great Revelation" of Simon the Gnostic, 
the subject of the dyad and the hermaphrodite is rendered in terms 
that bear repeating: "This is he who was, is, and shall be, a male- 
female power like the preexisting limitless power that exists in the 
One and has neither beginning nor end. It was from this limitless 
power that the thought hidden in the One first came forth and 
became two. . . . Thus it happens that whatever is manifested by 
him, although only one, is found to be two, male and female, having 
the female within himself." 23 

Demeter Archetypes and Aphrodite Archetypes, the Virgin, and Ultimate 
Nakedness 

So far we have examined the original polarity in abstract 
metaphysical terms* Wc shall now pass on to the form of actual divine 
figures and of appearances of gods and powers. As we said earlier, 
such figures stood for arkhai or real beings in traditional antiquity. 
With them wc are drawing near to the existential plane or actual 
human sexuality since in this new sphere the meanings of the sacred 
myth are linked to cults, institutions, and ritual acts* To arrive at 
differentiated characterizations in the mythological field, however, 
we must be discriminating. We meet with a myriad of figures that 
almost always have a polyvalent character and that refract in highly 
varied meanings both because of their manifold aspects and because 
of exogenous historical reasons and the transmutation of mythical 
stories and different cults and civilizations* 

The female principle in its manifold images and epiphanies can 
be classified under the signs of two basic types, which we shall call 
l he Aphrodite type and the Demeter type, the everlasting archetypes 
of the human lover and human mother. They correspond to the 
"power of ihe divine," ornia, hule, or Shakli in their respective aspects 
of luree in I he pure slate and o I force tlru has received form from ihc 



126 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



127 



eternal male and has become life that nourishes a form. 

The Demeter type in the ancient Western world was witnessed as 
early as the late Paleolithic age, continued into the Neolithic age and 
took shape in the pre-Hdlenic mother goddesses. It reappeared in a 
southern strip that began at the Pyrenees, passed through the Aegean 
civilization, Egypt, and Mesopotamia, and reached pre- Aryan 
India and Polynesia. The theme of fertility is displayed most 
obviously as a naturalistic tradition of the idea of the Goddess 
conceived as life itself and the origin of life. It is expressed in the 
shapeless idols with protruding buttocks of the Paleolithic age; but 
also in the late chaste form of Hellenized Demeter, it can be seen in 
the most ancient naked goddesses, where the most extravagant 

I representations consist of the many-breasted goddess and of naked 

, female images standing or lying down with their legs spread apart to 
exhibit the sexual organ and to release and make flow the sexual 

j sacrum, the magical energy, the mana of fertility of the primordial 

v Genetrix or Mother. 25 

Among some primitive peoples the same theme is mainly 
expressed in the stylized linear design of the womb and sexual organ, 
namely in the upside-down triangle, in which there is sometimes a 
line at the lower vertex to show the beginning of the vulvar cleft; this 
design acted as a symbol of a magical force intended to fertilize and, 
at the same time, to frighten and ward off those persons who were not 
allowed to draw near. 26 A similar meaning can be seen in the female 
act of anasurma or pulling up her clothes and showing her sex, which 
also could frighten, as for instance when that act was used by the 
Lycian w r omen to cause the threatening waves of Poseidon to 
retreat, 27 and when in the Islamic cycle, together with the removal of 
her veil, it was used by the ancient moon goddess al-Uzzos to stop the 
emissary of the Prophet, who wanted to fell the trees that were sacred 
to her. 28 

This is not the time to cite the manifold names of the Great God- 
dess or Magna Mater Genetrix, the image of the Demeter principle, 
but also very real power and force. She is Mother Earth. She is the 
Iranian Ardvi, whom Ahura Mazda called his "Water," linked to a 
I mythical river coming down from the heights. From that river 
springs forth the waters of the earth in their symbolic meanings of 
life-giving energies and forces of fecundity and fertilization. Here the 
wet principle constitutes the elementary substance of the Goddess, 
and a Neoplatonist etymology also emphasizes the other aspect of 
that principle when it derives the name of one of her manifestations 
in the shape of Rhea, from the word rein, meaning to How. For this 
reason we see goddesses of the Demeter type, such as the A i give 
I Ier;i, and ulsoof the Amazonian type, such as Pallas Aihcna, ret over 



i 



their virginity by diving into the water consubstantial with their 
original substance, renew them, and reintegrate their nature. 29 The 
mysteries of Hera relate how she always emerges a virgin again from 
her ritual bath in the spring w r aters of Kanathos. 30 We should also 
bear in mind the link between the Roman cult of Vesta and spring 
water or flowing w r ater; it alone was used as "living water" in certain 
purifying rites performed by the vestal virgins — aqua vivis fontibus 
amnibusque haima (water drawn from the living springs and rivers). 31 
So Ganga, the Hindu Great Goddess, manifests in "liquid form* 1 as 
the sacred river whose waters wash away all sins. 32 

The supreme essential principle in the world of such figures is the 
Grear Goddess, who, like Hesiod*s Gaia, procreates without a 
husband or by having herself fecundated by a husband who is at the 
same time her son. In this case her mate is subordinate to her and 
only instrumental. He is often a short-lived being who dies and arises 
again thanks only to the goddess (Tammuz and Attis in respect of 
Rhea-Cybele and Is h tar) because in her alone lies the true principle 
and spring of life. We arc here on the borderline of those scissions 
and absolutes which make way for Demeter as gynecocracies (not 
necessarily in the form of social sovereignty by woman but, more 
generally, in the form of a preeminence of everything linked to her as 
mother) or those regressions that lead to the idea, cited earlier, of 
earthly immortality or the immortality of the Mother. It is within the 
framework of these absolutes that the female principle, connected 
mainly to the earth, can also assume the figure of a heavenly 
sovereign divinity, the Great Mother of the Gods; this is a 
transformation that we can see especially in the person of the 
Egyptian Isis. Isis, who was originally an earth goddess — in cosmic- 
naturalistic symbolism, the black earth of Egypt, watered and 
fertilized by the streams of the Nile representing the male Osiris — is> 
in fact, introduced into the heavenly world and becomes "the Lady of 
the Sky* or "She Who Gives Light to the Sky" or "the Queen of All 
the Gods." 33 In the same way, the goddess of the Elamites wears the 
tiara of sovereignty and holds in her right hand a cup, from which she 
gives mortals the vital intoxicating fluid to drink, and in her left hand 
a ring as a symbol of the unending circle of generation. When the 
Great Goddess passes on from being Mother Earth and takes on, in 
particular, the form of a moon goddess, we can see another 
expression of the basic meanings mentioned earlier. In fact, the 
moon is the planet that changes. Being linked to the force at work 
wherever there is change, alteration, and transformation, it reflects 
in some way the very nature of the Waters and of cosmic ule 
{matter). Star of I he nighl, lady of I he night — in the moral 
Indisposition, "changeable and ineonslan! slur" by way of this 



128 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



129 



t 



connection the moon is associated with the divine female archetype; 
thus the sickle of the moon is also represented as an attribute of the 
Iranian Ardvi, who, we said, is the "Water" of Ahura Mazda. 

Perhaps in the Hindu manifestations of the Great Goddess (in 
Kali, Bhairavi, Karala, and above all in Durga, all various forms of 
the wife or Shakti of the "divine male") is seen the best expression of 
the Aphrodite principle of primordial womanhood as the dissolving, 
ovenvhelming, ecstatic, and unmeasurable force of sex, in opposition 
to Demeterian womanhood. In the Mediterranean world such 
features belong mainly to the goddess Ishtar, goddess of love, 
together with many other goddesses, such as Mylitta, Astarte, Tanit, 
Ashera, and Anaitis. One fundamental characteristic ought to be 
examined here: the name of Durga, the corresponding Hindu 
goddess, means "the Inaccessible One/ 7 but she is also the goddess 
of orgiastic rites. The Mediterranean goddesses cited just now often 
have the attribute of "virgins," parthenos. Ishtar is a "virgin" but at 
the same time the "Great Whore," the "Heavenly Prostitute." 34 Kali 
is deemed a "virgin" in the aspect of Adya-Kali; she is kumarirupa 
dkarini. Aphrodite goddesses who have lovers are thought of as 
virgins, and so arc goddesses of the Demeter type who are mothers. 
Pome, Hetaira, and Pandemos were names that in the Aegean and 
Antolian world were compatible with their opposite, "virgin." Shing- 
mu, the Great Goddess, the Chinese Virgin Mother, is at the same 
time the patroness of whores. To move to another cultural field, the 
heavenly Islamic houris, who offer themselves continuously to the 
embraces of the chosen, are described as being always virgins again. 
In a materialistic transposition, an echo of this idea can even be found 
in the Christian belief that Mary, besides having conceived as a 
virgin, remained so even after giving birth. This most profound 
meaning has been missed by those who explain it only in terms of the 
many connotations that the word "virgin" had in ancient times, for it 
designated not only a woman prior to sexual experience, but also an 
unmarried woman, a girl who had intercourse with a man out of 
wedlock, but shunned the bonds and vassaldom of wedded life. 35 
Rather, emphasis is to be placed on the capacity of the "raw material" 
to receive and be impregnated with every form without w r earying or 
being possessed in its ultimate root. 36 Virginity is therefore deemed 
to be the quality of the "divine female," It constitutes the "Durga" 
(inaccessible) aspect of the divine female and is also linked to the cold 
quality, which can exist alongside the gleaming and fascinating 
quality of the Aphrodite archetype and of the courtesan. In the most 
common representation of the sirens, who were said to be virgins as 
well as enchantresses, their lower part is shaped like a fish and is wet 
and cold. 



i 



A similar example is the female goddesses of the Amazonian type, 
whose chastity or virginity in the modern meaning of the word was 
often just a later accretion to ancient figures in an attempt to make 
them seem moral. Thus, for instance, it is known that Artemis-Diana 
and Athena, who w^ere essentially conceived by the Hellenic world as 
virgins, were mother goddesses of the foregoing type when they were 
pre-Hellenic and Pelasgian divinities. In this context the virgin 
goddesses and Ishtar herself, virgin and whore at one and the same 
time, could also be presented as goddesses of war and victory (the 
Venus Victrix, Ishtar invoked as the "Lady of Arms," the "Arbiter 
of Battles"). In the following invocation addressed to her, one sees 
the duality of motifs: "Thou art strong, O Lady of Victory, who canst 
awaken my violent desires." Przylusky correctly called attention to 
the fact that the Great Goddess was also the goddess of fighting, 
because in such a case war is considered essentially under the sole 
aspect of action that destroys and slays. 38 It is at such a level that 
Aphrodite takes to herself, as areia y the characteristics of a warrior 
goddess with the esoteric meaning of power or shakti or Ares-Mars. 
Here, therefore, emphasis is given to the ambiguity of a power that is 
at one and the same time a power of life and death; indeed it was said 
that Astarte is "Goddess Astarte, the life and safety of gods and men, 
and she who is also destruction, death, and annihilation/' 39 She is the 
shining moon goddess whose other face, however, is the "black" 
unfathomable goddess, the Mother of Darkness, Hecate of the 
underworld (the virgin Artemis also sometimes takes on the aspect of 
Hecate), Juno of the netherworld, the Lady of Pluto (Virgil), Ishtar, 
and Kali* "Dreadful Mother"; these are archetypes in which also 
converge the symbolism of derived figures, such as the virgins of 
battles and storms, the Nordic Valkyrie and the Iranian FravashL 
Men seek to employ and arouse the goddess, as unchained power and 
the power of death, against their foes; then indeed she takes on the 
characteristics of a goddess of war and of the Promachos (champion) 
fighting like a lion with javelin and bow. And when this power leads 
to victory, the Virgin appears in the end like a goddess of victory too. 
'Thus Durga is also the black virgin, krishna kumari, invoked as she 
who gives victory in battle, 40 There is a netherworld aspect to this 
which is interesting to observe, in the Roman devatio, for example, a 
gloomy rite in which a general offered himself of his own free will as a 
victim to the forces of the netherworld so as to unleash them against 
the foe. In the invocation proper to this rite, after the litany of 
luminous divinities including Mars, comes the name of Bellona, who 
is precisely a goddess of war in the sense we mentioned but is also 
identified by ancient writers with other forms of the Great 
Goddess. " We imixi also cite the Hgypiian Seklnnet . the lion-headed 



130 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses > Men and Women 



131 



goddess of war, who rejoiced in bloody sacrifices and was said to 
copulate with the victors. 

On the moral plane, cruelty is attributed to the goddess in her 
Durga aspect in various mythical talcs thai have constellated around 
figures of this kind. The goddess takes delight in blood and death. 
This can be seen very clearly in Kali* But human sacrifices were 
offered in ancient times to the divine Virgin, Artemis Orthis ? who 
was called Taurian Artemis, at several places in Greece, at Sparta* 
Brauron, and elsewhere. After these sacrifices were stopped^ a trace 
of them stili remained at Sparta during the festivals of the goddess in 
the rite of the diamastigosis or whipping of adolescents so that their 
blood bathed her altar, for the virgin goddess loved blood. In other 
Greek cities, too, the worshippers of Dcmeter whipped each other in 
turn. The festival of Cybele at Rome, inspired by the worship of the 
Great Goddess, was held from the fifteenth to the twenty-seventh of 
March, the latter date being marked in the calendar as the dies 
sanguinis or day of blood. On that day the priests of the goddess 
whipped and lacerated themselves, uniting their cries to the sound of 
the flutes and kettledrums. Then, after a mysterious vigil, it was 
believed that the initiates copulated with the Great Goddess. 42 The 
orgiastic rites dedicated to the goddess Ma, who was also a goddess of 
war, had the same character. In the same context, the performance of 
bloody sacrifices was often entrusted to priestesses; this was the case 
among the Gauls and in America. In an archaic Roman rite 
performed by the vestal virgins, sacred guardians of the flame of life, 
twenty- four dolls were thrown into the Tiber, yet it is the prevalent 
opinion that human victims originally were thrown instead of dolls. 
We must distinguish the meaning of the nakedness in the Durga 
aspect of the goddess as opposed to the nakedness of the Demeter- 
Mother archetype, principle of fecundity. The first is the Aphroditic 
"ultimate nakedness." The strongest and most expressive symbolic 
£uid ritual expression of this is linked to the sacred dance of the seven 
f veils. The teaching of the mysteries included the symbolism of pass- 
ing through the seven planetary spheres and freeing oneself little by 
little of the various determining and conditional qualities related to 
those spheres, which were conceived as being so many clothes and 
covering to be thrown away until a person reached the state of the 
"ultimate nakedness" of absolute and simple being, which is only it- 
self when it is beyond the "seven." In this context, Plotinus 43 cites 
those who ascend by degrees in the holy mysteries, laying aside their 
clothes and advancing in nakedness, whereas in Sufisrn a parallel 
exists in the tamzig or tearing of clothes during ecstasy. In I he 
opposite realm, that of "nature," the corresponding process is the 
stripping of the feminine power ol "all lis forms until ii appears' hi ils 



elementary character or virgin substance prior and superior to all, 1 
form. It is precisely that which is made perceptible by the progressive? ' 
freeing of the woman from the seven veils until she is shown utterly 
naked, just as, in the Egyptian invocation cited earlier, I sis is desired 
to appear and as in the myth of Ishtar also, who descends to the 
netherworld and leaves a part of her ornaments and clothes a* each of 
the seven doors through which she goes. This is the reverse of uranic 
nakedness. Ultimate female nakedness can also act in a deadly way: 
the sight of naked Diana killed Actaeon ("invulnerable and mortal 
Diana"), while that of naked Athena made Tiresias blind. The 
prohibition or taboo of nakedness that is met with in certain 
traditions and customs, even among primitive peoples, stems from 
earlier rituals. The sight of wholly naked images in the Greek 
mysteries corresponded to the highest grade of initiation or epopteia, 
. and in the ritual of Tan trie sexual practice, the woman to be used 
appears as the embodiment of prakriti, the divine female and 
primordial substance hidden beneath the numberless forms of 
manifestation. The naked woman represents this very substance 
freed of all form and in its "virgin and ultimate state/' On the other 
hand, female nakedness is graduated in the rite; the use of a wholly 
naked woman is not permitted to everyone, but only to Tantric 
initiates of a high grade. Only these were allowed to see ultimate 
nakedness, to possess the naked Virgin without deadly peril or 
profanation. 44 A similar meaning may be found in the paradoxical 
ritual union between an ascetic and a whore in the Mahavrata 
i festival; as though for a woman reduced to her primal state, the 
inaccessible substratum of all form (the "prostitute"), the only fitting 
mate would be one who by asceticism had been reintegrated into his 
own principle or into the opposite primal state of transcendental 
manhood. Symbolically connected to this is the Hermetic saying that 
' the bride and bridegroom should remove their clothes and bathe 
thoroughly before entering their nuptial bed where the mysterium 
conjunctionis is performed. 45 

But we shall deal with these ritual complexes later. We shall end 
now by indicating the specific feature that is highlighted in 
appearances of the Great Goddess as Varummi. This Hindu divinity, 
also known as Varum or Sura, appeared as a goddess of the sky, of the 
waters, and of intoxicating drinks. The word varuni in Pali 
designates actually either an intoxicating liquor or an enraptured or 
possessed woman, and Varuni or Sura in epic poetry is the 
"daughter* 1 of Varuna, the male uranic god, who brings happiness 
and intoxication to the gods. In India the link between Varuni and 
iitiuxkniinj' drinks is cerlain (so much so that., in some writings, lo 
think rfrm Ptinim, llu* muiiifesJnlinn ol llie goddess in liquid form. 



A 



?A 



132 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



133 



means to drink an alcoholic beverage). Sura is also one of the names 
of the Great Goddess in Iran. 46 Even in the hymns of the austere 
Shankara, the goddess is described with intoxicating drinks and 
holds up the goblet or is herself inebriated. 47 In this divine 
archetype, therefore, the aspect of the female as the principle and 
cause of intoxication is established. And that intoxication can have 
the lower, elementary, Dionysiac, savage, and maenadic form or the 
higher form of a transfiguring, enlightening intoxication. 

Christianity was obscurely fixed on this second aspect in the figure 
of the Virgin Mother who stands above, her foot on the sickle of the 
moon or even the serpent, which, as Nahash, symbolized in Hebrew 
esotericism the elementary, cosmic principle of desire. To that may 
be linked the division existing in the ancient mysteries of the Mother, 
wherein the lesser mysteries of Persephone of the netherworld, who 
is connected also to Aphrodite, were celebrated in the spring more or 
less at the same time as the various orgiastic, chthonic festivals, 
whereas the Great Eleusinian mysteries were celebrated in the 
autumn. We may also bear in mind the Aegean goddess, Our Lady of 
the Waves and Stella Maris, in her twofold aspect of goddess who 
descends from the skies and goddess who appears from the nether 
regions, one the "goddess of doves" and the other the "goddess of 
snakes" and panthers. 48 

As a last point, if we consider the cosmic substance or power in its 
aspect fixed to a given form in which it remains held in its fluid , fleet- 
ing, unrestrainable character, we have the Demeter principle in the 
form of female figures as "brides" tied to a god by the bonds of one 
single marriage or one single being; the substance then is no longer 
the "Virgin" or the "Whore" but is the divine wife as a "sealed foun- 
tain" who, when viewed on the moral level of the archetype, has the 
characteristics of chastity and faithfulness such as to hide her original 
nature (the Great Goddess as Hera). In the myth, the divine sexed 
couples paired in a relationship of relative harmony and equilibrium 
correspond to this ontological situation. 

Typical Differentiations of Manhood in Myth 

Typical figures in myth that embody the male principle act in a 
certain way as counterparts to the appearances of the female, first 
according to the pure Aphrodite aspect, then to the Durga aspect, 
and last to the Demeter-Mother aspect. 
, Bachofen partly sketched this morphology, starting with mythical 
tales from Mediterranean antiquity clustering around the figure of 
Dionysus. His method of associations, which at first gives the im- 
pression of a confused attempt at harmonization, actually uncovers 
proloniui sigiimcimces. 



i 



First we should consider, as a lower limit, the Chthonic-Poseidon 
form of manhood. At this level Dionysus was linked to both Posei- 
don, god of the waters, and to Osiris, conceived as the stream of the 
Nile, which waters and fertilizes Isis, the black earth of Egypt. At a 
higher level Dionysus is linked to Hephaestos- Vulcan, the god of the 
fire of the netherworld. In the first of these mythical tales there is a 
displacement of the symbolism of the Waters since they now desig- 
nate the wet principle of generation related to the merely phallic con- 
cept of manhood; the god is the male considered only according to 
the aspect of the being who fecundates the female substance and, as 
such, is subordinate to her. The changeover to the god of the fire of 
the netherworld takes us only one step forward since we are dealing 
with an earthly and still dim, savage, elementary fire, whose counter- 
part is still the Aphroditic womanhood in her state of weakness 
(Aphrodite as the unfaithful wife of Vulcan). 

A higher appearance of the male principle is indicated by Bachofen 
at the point where Dionysus is seen as a bright and heavenly nature 
because of his link with the moon god and with the sun and Apollo. 
But the fact that Dionysus in these same mythic forms is always 
joined with female figures related to the archetype of the Great God- 
dess signifies a limit that is evident in the fact that, even when Diony- 
sus is seen as the sun god, as the sun itself, he is considered not in the 
aspect of pure, unchangeable light but as the star that dies and rises 
again. This is precisely the central theme of Orphic Dionysiac wor- 
ship, which in this way fits into the background of the religion of the 
Mother and comprises the same situation as Attis and Tammuz, male 
mortals gods whom the immortal Goddess always causes to rise again 
(in fact, instead of Attis we can also find Sabazius alongside Cybeie; 
and Sabazius is often identified with Dionysus); in the same way the 
sun sets and rises again, and its light is still not the steady, abstract 
light of pure being or of the pure Olympian principle. 

Development of the series involves passing on to another mythical 
complex beyond the one based on Dionysus* The connecting links 
can be identified as Dionysus in the guise of a foe and conqueror of 
the Amazons and also the treachery of Aphrodite in coupling with 
Ares, the god of war. Ares, the Hellenic Mars, has features that 
embody a savage manhood which is heroic and no longer phallic nor 
Dionysiac in a promiscuous and elementary sense; but the 
embodiment of such manhood is Dorian Heracles. Heracles, too, 
was a conqueror of the Amazons, and moreover a foe of the Mother 
(of Hera, just as Roman Hercules was the foe of Bona Dea), from 
whose bonds he freed himself; but he still possessed her principle in 
obtaining Hebe, everlasting youth, ns his wife in Olympus after 
ulliiininp. [he way in ilu garden ol (he Ik'spcritk-smul plucking there 



134 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



135 



the golden apple, itself a symbol linked to the Mother (the apples had 
been given by Gea to Hera) and to the life force. 

The representations of ascetic and Apollonian manhood must be 
deemed still higher than Heracles with the symbolism of his labors, 
which emphasize heroic manhood and, to some extent, resistance to 
the dominion of women (we shall talk about the important symbo- 
lism of the garment of Nessus in its proper place). Here we can con- 
sider Shiva as a connecting element, as the god of a cult and not as a 
metaphysical principle; if, on the one hand, in the Alexandrine 
period, he was taken to be the same as Dionysus, god of the orgiastic 
rites, on the other hand, he was also thought of as the great ascetic of 
the high peaks. He had a wife, Parvati, but was not held in bondage 
by her, for he was able to strike with lightning the god of love, Kama, 
when the latter sought to awaken in him desire of need, privation, 
thirst, and dependence, (In Hindu myth, Kama was revived by Shiva 
through the intercession of divinities, such as Rati, who personify 
forms of pure erotic experience, free of conditional qualities*) 

Above all the ascetic struggles, manhood, next, has a typical sym- 
bol in Heruka, whose severe and imposing heroic beauty is 
sometimes even frightening. He is the naked divinity and shining 
scepter-bearer of the Hindu-Tibetan pantheon; here nakedness 
expresses a meaning opposed to that: of female ultimate nakedness 
and represents pure being in itself, the "purity" or dominating uranic 
simplicity which is dangerous for woman (to see man in such 
"nakedness" may signify that she will lose him forever, which is 
another well-known theme in the saga). But Shiva often already had 
the same attribute, namely dtgambara or "the naked one." 

Therefore, to go back to Hellenic themes, the series can have as its 
upper limit the Apollonian manifestation of pure manhood. Here 
Apollo is the embodiment of Olympian nous (perception) and of 
unchangeable uranic light, freed from the earthly element and also 
from his connection with goddesses in some spurious historical 
varieties of his worship. At this level Apollo, as the god of "pure 
form," was conceived without a mother and was "born by himself," 
ametdr (without a mother) and autophuh (self-growing), being the 
Doric god who "produced form geometrically." (The determination 
of plastic matter is proper to the male and to form, whereas the 
indeterminate nature of plastic matter and the limitless, apeimn, 
belongs to the female.) In the opinion of Orestes, Apollo defends the 
principle opposed to that of motherhood without a husband but also 
to Demeter or Aphrodite womanhood. Orestes said that it is actually 
the father who generates a child, whereas the mother is only the 
"foster-mother" of the child. 5 " This is the affirmation and 
cormbonilion of I he relationship given in metaphysical terms 



it 



between the everlasting male and the everlasting female. But in the 
Apollonian symbol there is something besides reaffirming order 
"according to justice" between the two principles, which takes us 
beyond the whole world of the Dyad. Therefore, let us establish the 
principal types of male in this order; first, phallic and earthly 
manhood; next, Dionysiac manhood in a strict sense; third, heroic 
manhood; fourth, ascetic manhood; and last, Apollonian or 
Olympian manhood; for they are the centers of mythical stories and 
can be found in endless varieties in widely differing traditions, as the 
counterparts of the chthonic Mothers, Demeter goddesses, 
Aphrodite goddesses, and, last, of the ambiguous, unfathomable, 
Amazonian, and destructive "Virgins." 

Male and Female in Manifestation 

In the preceding sections we have passed more than once from the 
male and female principles as static categories or divine forms to a 
consideration of them as dynamic powers standing in varying re- 
lationships to each other. To deal in greater detail with this special 
aspect, we must first state an important definition. 

No complete metaphysical and traditional doctrine has ever consi- 
dered the Dyad as the highest reference point for a view of the world. 
Beyond the yin andjyang, the traditions of the Far East recognize the 
"Great Unity," Tai-cki or Vai-i. Plotinus wrote of the One superior 
and prior to the divine duality of nous (perception) and ule (matter), 
of "being" and life force. Tantrism knows Nirguna- Brahman or 
another equivalent principle beyond the Shiva-Shakti Dyad, and so 
on. This signifies that the two principles cannot attain an equal rank. 
The male principle of the Dyad — : yang, Shiva, or being — reflects the 
One or transcendental being; it represents and embodies this One in 
the process of universal manifestation and in the relativity and 
tendency of forms (in Plotinus, in the form of logos or reason). As 
regards "nature," we may say in theological terms that it is not a 
principle that coexists with God but that it springs from God and 
therefore has a "second reality." 51 

Hence the male has an ontological or metaphysical preeminence of 
right over the female; but we do not say that such a preeminence 
always exists in actual fact. On the contrary, the first phase of 
manifestation must be characterized by the freeing and acting of the 
awakened female power, which gains the upper hand over the 
principle of pure being and of the identical. It keeps that upper hand 
throughout the whole descending or emanatory phase in tht proodos 
or progress of Plotinus, or in the pravritti-marga which we spoke of 
when dealing vviiti the Way of the Right Hand and the Way of the 
I ^fl Hand. " This phase loniiuncs mil i I ;\ limii marked by an 



136 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



137 



equilibrium of the two principles, after which there is a turning 
point , a crisis or breaking point. The power of Shakti can be 
dissolved or lost in the infinite, or be recovered in steps and governed 
by the opposite principle. Then the male forever has the upper hand 
to a greater and greater extent until there is a full, clear possession of 
that which has "become." Brought by the female, it is vested in the 
male as the awakener of becoming, until there is a higher synthesis 
that reproduces the primordial unity in a certain way. After the 
lowest point of the cycle, the ascending arc turns toward that which 
in Christian terms may be called the "consummation." It can be 
linked to the Way of the Left Hand and slays under the sign of Shiva 
as a god of "transcendence," whereas the first phase is under the sign 
not only of Shakti but also of the gods of creation and preservation, 
Brahma and Vishnu, 

It is important to recognize that these various phases are not a tem- 
poral succession but manifold possible circumstances with varying 
relationships between male and female, form and matter. Sky and 
Earth, yang and .y in, with now one and now the other principle pre- 
dominating. These circumstances can be found everywhere: in the 
cosmos and its periods; in history and its ages; in the structure and 
spirit of cults, civilizations, and societies. Consider the opposition 
between civilizations of the Father ruled by men and those of the 
Mother ruled by women, between institutions based on paternal 
right and those governed by the matriarchal principle. In individu- 
als, too, it is the predominance of one principle over the other that 
leads to sexual development (as sex of the body and also of the soul). 
Thus, seemingly abstract concepts actually provide basic leads to 
orient ourselves in the perception of every reality. 

It may be noted that behind various figures in the myth of the 
"Fall" is often hidden the idea of a loss of the male principle in the 
female one (or "cosmic" one) or an identification of the male with the 
female so far as to assume its way of being. That is what happens of 
necessity in the first phase of manifestation, which for pure being 
must have the sense of a progressive darkening or oblivion (the 
Hindu avidya or, in Plato's myth, the drunken and fainting Poros 
copulating with Penial, the nous (perception) which is swallowed by 
darkness in the embrace of the physis (nature), the melting away of 
Narcissus, and so on. In the Corpus Henneiicum we find; "Although 
male-female [hermaphrodite] like the Father [as the One, of whom 
the male is the reflection] and superior to sleep, it is dominated by 
sleep." 53 The awakening or revival (in soterio logical terms, the 
"redemption" or "salvation") can happen in the circumstances of t he 
second, ascending or Shiva phase. The presupposition for this is the 
passing of the turning point and the overcoming of (he resistance 



offered by the female binding force or force tending toward the 
limitless; it is the breaking of the "cosmic" level. 

A list of the typical myths that have given meaning to this context 
would be too long to cite. For instance, we have already cited the kab- 
balistic idea of the exile of the Shekhinah symbolic of "breakage" in 
the realm of the divine powers (it is the phase of the dissolving or of 
being, as if on its own, of the cosmogonic Shakti), and we have also 
mentioned the corresponding idea of the everlasting Sabbath 
(understood as the reunion of the Holy One with his Shekhinah) in 
which everything will be referred to its original root. The wedding of 
the Holy One with his Shekhinah will also restore the unity of the 
Divine Name, which had been destroyed by the Fall. According to 
the tradition in question, every holy precept should have this as its 
aim, and so the formula that the Hasidim recite before fulfilling each 
commandment is "In the name of the unity oi the Holy One, blessed 
by he, with his Shekhinah." 54 

A similar motif in Christian gnosticism is the changes in fortune 
of cosmic Sophia in the netherworld until she was married by Christ 
(or Logos — reason — namely, he who reflects or "bears" the One, the 
"son" of transcendental being) and was brought back again into the 
world of Light. 55 The symbolic context is clear when Simon the 
Gnostic indicated the embodiment of Sophia in the woman he had 
with him, in Elena (Selene, the Moon), who had been a prostitute 
before and had now become his wife. More generally, we have the 
following important fragment of the Gnostic philosophy of Marcus: 
"I am the son of the Father, who is beyond all existence, whereas I am 
in existence, I came [into existence] to see [the things] which are mine 
and not mine [and which are to be referred to the male and female of 
the primordial Dyad respectively] and are not wholly mine [in the 
emanating phase] because they belong to Sophia, who is my female 
counterpart, and she made them for herself. But I derive my birth 
from him who is beyond existence, and I return again to the 
beginning whence I came." 56 The various phases are shown clearly in 
the mystery teaching as reported by Ireneus, 57 about Adam 3 die 
"unbreakable," who was also called "the foundation stone" and 
"glorious man." Here it is a question of the barrier behind which, in 
every man, is the inner man who springs from the heavenly 
archetype, Adam, who "has fallen in a work of clay and chalk and 
forgotten everything." Classical mythology speaks of the ebb and 
flow in opposite directions of the Ocean and the Waters, bringing 
lorih the birth of men in one case and in the other the birth of gods (a 
clear reference to the descending phase and the ascending phase in 
which the Waters are stopped and taken back on high, bringing the 
"kiiij'doiii of woman" in an end), 1 1 is said: **l r irsi I here is the blessed 



* 



138 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



nature of man from on high, Adam; next there is mortal nature down 
here; and third there is the race of those without a king who have 
ascended up above where Mariana is, she who is sought [the female as 
principle of reintegration],'* The being produced by the current 
thrust back on high is called the "hermaphroditic man [tirsenothlus] 
which is in everyone." Last, there is talk of two statues of naked 
ithy phallic men (with erect phalluses) at the temple of Samothrace. One 
is interpreted as the image of the primordial in ale , Adam, and the 
other as the image of the reborn man "who has, in everything and for 
everything, the same nature as the first." This same knowledge 
continued unchanged in the Hermetic tradition, in the Middle Ages, 
and up to the early modern epoch. Pernety wrote of the "Whore/* 
identified with the Moon, whom the Royal Art brought back again to 
the state of the Virgin, the "Virgin who, animated by the seed of the 
first male and united with a second male [man as representative of the 
primordial male who fertilized the life substance in the beginning], 
will conceive again through the bodily seed of the second male and 
will beget in the end a hermaphroditic youth who will be the source of 
a race of very powerful kings, ?nH Essentially, this is the same mystery 
that we mentioned when speaking of the Far Eastern tradition and 
that we called the "Mystery of the Three" through which the One, 
being united with the female Two, returns to itself. Implicit in the 
rectification or transmutation of the feminine polarity are both the 
Hermetic symbol of the "Son who generates the Mother 1 and also the 
strange expression of Dante regarding the Virgin, "Virgin Mother, 
daughter of your son." 

The importance of such traditions lies in their direct relationship 
to both the world of the ancient mysteries and also to the theme of the 
hermaphrodite. They also provide us with a way to approach a world 
of actions and realizations. 

The first of these two points relates to the theme found in Plato 
which has served as a basis for understanding the metaphysics of 
eros, namely the myth of the hermaphrodite. It is shown integrated 
into a context of universal character and defined against a cosmic 
background. It may be interesting to provide some further 
documentation in this respect. 

The Corpus HermeAicm speaks of the state of original 
hermaphroditism, which at a given moment ceased, "as its period 
was completed"; then the male on one side and the female on the 
other took shape. 59 Apart from the doctrine of the Shekhinah, the 
kabbalistic interpretation of Genesis contains the same theme. 
According to the Bereshith Rabba (I, i, 26), primordial man was an 
hermaphrodite. The woman taken from Adam was called Ayeslui 
because she was taken from Aycsh ("man"]; (hen Adam gave her I lit* 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



139 



name Eve ("life," "the living") because he could return to the unity 
through her, 60 In this text, as also later in Maimonides, 61 we meet the 
same Platonic tale of the being broken into two parts and also the 
theme of the being "who in some respects is one and in others is two." 
Leo the Hebrew (Jehuda Abardanel) also referred explicitly to Plato 
and tried to relate his doctrine of the hermaphrodite to the biblical 
myth of the Fall, thereby retaining Plato's interpretation of eros's 
most profound meaning. The fact that man leaves his father and 
mother and unites himself with woman, forming one single flesh 
with her, as the Bible says, is explained by Leo the Hebrew as an 
impulse of the two parts to re-create the original unity since the two 
"had been separated out of one and the same individual." 62 

This story taken from the mysteries was not unknown to the Greek 
fathers, and from them it was passed on, most likely through 
Maximus the Confessor, to Scotus Eriugena, to whom we owe a 
version that is worth telling. Scotus taught that "the division of 
substances starts in God himself and is defined in a progressive 
descent as far as the limit which is the separation of man from 
woman. Therefore, the reunification of subtances also must begin in 
man and retrace the same steps until it reaches God, in whom there is 
no separation because in him everything is One [equivalent to the 
level of the One in Plotinus or of the Great Unity of the Far East, 
etc.]. The unification of creatures, therefore, begins in man." Both 
in Plato and Scotus the metaphysical theme is set forth in moral 
terms, related to the "all" (we have already seen that this concept 
corresponds metaphysically to the ontological and dynamic situation 
proper to the descending or emanating phase). Scotus taught in this 
way that "if the first man had not sinned, his nature would not have 
undergone sexual differentiation," and that this differentiation only 
took place with the Fall. 63 From this comes the eschatological 
counterpart: "The reunification of the sexually divided human being 
into his original unity, in which he was neither man nor woman but 
merely a human being, will be followed by the reunification of the 
earthly sphere with paradise at the consummation of the due period 
of time." 64 Christ must have foreseen this restoration of the original 
ontological status of being. Scotus recounts the tradition, which 
draws its origin from circles belonging to the mysteries cited earlier, 
but for which he mentions Maximus the Confessor as the source, 
according to which Christ must have united the divided sexes in his 
own nature and must have been "neither man nor woman*' at the 
resurrection, although "he was bom and died man/' 65 Through the 
grace of I he redemption > man has also been made virtually capable of 
the same. ** 

In Srolns I'jiiij'eiia these views h;»ve a simple theological and 



140 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses., Men and Women 



141 



eschatological doctrinal character. There is no reference to eros as a 
possible tool for the reintegration or to any concrete proceedings. On 
the other hand, there is reason to believe that the mystery of the 
hermaphrodite, with greater adherence to the initiation tradition 
where it had already taken shape before the arrival of Christianity, 
was assumed on an operative level by Hermetic and alchemic 
tradition, which, from the very beginning and since the Hellenistic 
texts, had traced back the essence of the Great Work to the union of 
male with female. In medieval literature as well as in extensions of it 
up to a relatively recent period, the Hermetic and alchemic tradition 
also gave great importance to the enigmatic symbol of the "Rebis" in 
alluding to the "double being," the hermaphroditic being which 
unites in itself the twofold nature, male and female, solar and lunar. 
From this literature we can pick out as particularly suggestive the 
hermaphrodite figure corresponding to epigram 33 of Michele 
Maier's Scrutmium chymicum with the caption "The hermaphrodite, 
lying like a dead man among the shadows, needs Fire." 67 We shall 
come back at the proper time to the practical teachings that refer to 
this, those teachings capable of being applied practically in terms of 
sexual magic. To end this digression, we shall only say that, along the 
lines of this same tradition, the link established by Scotus Eriugena 
between. Christ and the hermaphrodite crops np again, in Khunrath. 
In illustration II of his Amphiteatrum e teniae sapientiae (1606) we can 
in fact see Adam-Eve regenerated in the shape of a hermaphrodite 
and bearing the caption "The man who rejects the binary [Dyad], 
clothed with Christ and imitating Christ." The same theme is given 
more explicitly in illustration III of the same work, where the 
philosopher's stone is shown. In the middle pari of it is the Rebis 
Man- Woman, Sun-Moon, with the proverb "The world too shall be 
renewed by Fire," 

Lastly we may note this fact: it is hard to deny the existence of eso- 
tericism in Leonardo da Vinci. Indeed, the theme of the 
hermaphrodite has an obvious emphasis in his paintings, especially 
in the most significant of them, which refer to Saint John and to 
Bacchus (Dionysus), Furthermore, there recurs enigmatically in 
them, almost like a monogram, the theme of the columbine, a plant 
that was deemed to he hermaphroditic. 

On the Daemonic in the Feminine and the Symbolism of the Inverted 
Coitus 

It is well known that the female principle has been linked in the 
traditions of many peoples not only to the principle of "seduction" 
but also to a daemonic element. According to the Kabbala, the 
daemonic indeed springs from I he female clement /'* and from I Itc.Vfii 
piuuiplr in Clinirsi* Taoism, while in the Kgyplian tradition ihe 



personification of the antisolar forces was mainly female; Isis herself 
sometimes had this character, as can be seen in the legend where she 
is given the traits of an enchantress who takes possession cunningly 
of the "name of power" of Ra so as to make him her subject. It 
would be easy to gather further data from different traditions on this 
aspect of the female. This must be understood not on a moral but on 
an ontological plane with reference to the natural partiality of the 
Shakti or principle of "matter" and the "Waters," whenever we 
consider manifestation in its dynamic and dramatic aspects as well as 
in the everlasting emanation process of a kind that is almost 
Spinozan. 

This brings us to an esoteric teaching very like the metaphysics of 
human sexuality. The female partiality toward the daemonic is 
shown in the attempt to catch and to absorb the principle of 
transcendental or magical manhood, linked to that which in the male 
reflects the supernatural clement prior to the Dyad, and to what in 
nature is higher than nature and should have the power to "make the 
stream of the waters flow back on high" and to break the cosmic 
bond. This is the exact meaning of the word virya in technical 
Buddhist terminology, whose root is the same as the Latin word vir 
("man"); it designates manhood in a lofty and transcendental sense as 
that which is brought into action in the ascent on high and can lead us 
beyond the region of "becoming" or samsara by "stopping the flow." 
According to the poly valence of the technical terminology of 
Tantrism and hatha yoga, however, the same word virya can also 
designate the male seed, which in a more general context connects 
with the theory that to man as such, owing to the simple fact of his 
manhood, or puniskamaira sambandhibhik, has been granted the 
potential to attain the supernatural completion of himself. 70 Now, it 
is part of the female nature to tend to enslave and absorb this 
principle in her Demeter or Aphrodite function, but not so much on 
a material and human plane, with reference to procreation and to the 
bonds of the flesh and desire, as on an occult level. In that she shows 
her essential dacmonism and her antagonistic function. She is 
oriented toward keeping that order which Gnosticism, in a dualistic 
background, called the "world of the Demiurge," the world of nature 
as opposed to that of the spirit. Thus it was possible to talk of a 
"draining death" that comes to man from woman because losing his 
virya or manly magical principle while mingling with the female 
substance of desire means for man "being erased from the Book of 
Life." Here, therefore, we have the theme of a natural 
"inexorableness" of the female principle and of a metaphysical "war 
of i lie sexes" beyond the sphere of merely human, individual, 
profane, and social relationships. 

JVU'vriuk tmiphasi/ed this mli^'oiy ol ideas and Jmwed I heir mosi 



A 



142 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



143 



drastic fulfillment in the ancient mysteries celebrated in Pontus 
under the sign of one variant of the Great Goddess, Isais, 71 But it is in 
no way foolhardy to attribute a similar meaning to the mysteries of 
Rhea-Cybele as well. The "holy orgy" celebrated under the sign of 
that goddess burst out in such an unmanning ecstatic intoxication 
that in its degenerate forms at the peak of the frenzy, the 
participating men sacrificed to the goddess the actual physical 
expression of the principle of their manhood through castration and 
wearing women's clothes. Besides^ in these and in other cults of the 
same cycle (the mysteries of Hecate of Laguira, of Astaroth, of 
Astarte of Hieropolis, of Artemis of Ephesus, etc.), the priests of the 
goddess were castrated or wore women's clothes. 

In the pre-Orphic worship of Dionysus, the female element 
prevailed. Besides the public cult, mysteries were celebrated from 
which, in some cases (as in the early bacchanals at Rome), men were 
excluded and only women were initiated. The Dionysiac woman 
exercised sovereignty over mere phallic manhood, whereby the 
exciting, accomplishing, and absorbing of that manhood were in 
practice the same as harming and breaking the transcendental 
manhood in accordance with the ambivalence of eros. 72 

However, the partiality of woman for the daemonic is 
acknowledged just as much in these "lower" forms as in the 
"heavenly" ones, which themselves involve a "cosmic" limit. 
Although "woman" can give life, yet she shuts off or tends to shut off 
access to that which is beyond life. This, too, is a subject that we 
often meet in the world of legends and heroic myths. Typical is the 
myth, for instance, about a heavenly woman who, even if she helped 
and protected the shaman, yet sought to have him for herself alone in 
the seventh heaven and fought against the continuation of his ascent. 
She told him that life beyond was cut off and tempted him with 
heavenly food/' In the heroic legends the love of a woman with more 
or less supernatural features was often presented as more of a 
hindrance and peril than as a help for the protagonist. 

It is essential to distinguish two kinds of mysteries, which we may 
call the greater and lesser mysteries or the mysteries of Amnion and 
the mysteries of Isis, which, however, have no strict historical links 
with the actual outward form of the ancient holy institutions which 
were given that name more on the basis of a general morphological 
definition. The lesser mysteries or mysteries of Isis may therefore be 
defined as the mysteries of the woman, those whose purpose was the 
"cosmic" reintegration of the individual and his union with the 
female substance, life force, and substratum of manifestation. Such 
mysteries can have either a bright or a daemonic nature, depending 
011 l heir functional dianiclcr. The daemonic [onus and 



circumstances indicated earlier occurred when the female principle 
of the mysteries was made absolute and activated in a function 
antagonistic to the supercosmic. As we said, this tendency may be 
always directly visible; but even when the principle of the Woman 
and Mother is transformed into the terms of a Divine Mother or 
Mother of God — a theme present earlier in ancient Aegean times and 
in the cult of Isis itself, which represented the goddess with a 
baby — similar to the Christian motif ianua coeli (Gate to Heaven), 
even then the limit remains. 

The great mysteries or mysteries of A mm on may be defined as 
those linked to the "reascent" or to the waters flowing back on .high 
and to the surpassing of the "cosmic" level 5 they are, therefore, 
under the sign of transcendental manhood and mark the beginning of 
that manhood's gaining the upper hand. 

One meaning in particular of the archetypal myth of incest can be 
fitted into this context. The woman, who had the function of the 
"mother" who gave the "Water of Life" and of resurrection to the 
divided being (this is the "second birth" of the lesser mysteries), was 
possessed by him to whom she had given birth in a certain way and 
who was her son. Although related to the Royal Art (which is said to 
reproduce the work of creation in its phases), this symbolism in 
alchemic Hermeticism was presented in a severe form. It is said that 
there was a first phase or regime of woman, of the Waters or Moon or 
whiteness, in which woman had the upper hand over man and 
reduced him to her nature (lesser mysteries); after the man had been 
dissolved in the opposed principle, however, the so -called regime of 
Fire or the Sun or redness came about, and in it the man regained the 
upper hand and reduced the woman to his nature. To indicate this 
second phase the texts sometimes employed the symbolism of incest 
between the son and mother. 74 When these two phases are 
considered, not in succession, but in opposition to each other, they 
correspond in their essential content to the two opposed forms of 
ecstasy or to the two traditions of the mysteries or the <c births," as we 
have seen. 

If we look through the rich and manifold traditional symbolism 
and imagery, wc find a rather expressive sign concerning this 
opposition in the contrasting meanings of one and the same curious 
theme, that of the "inverted coitus." One of those belongs to Egypt; 
the ancient Egyptian goddess Nut is a representation of the female 
that, like Isis herself, seems in the beginning to have had a chthonic 
character but thereafter to have assumed a heavenly and absolute 
one. Identified by Plutarch with Rhea, Nut appears as the "Great 
l.ady who gives birih lo the gods," ilic "Lady of the Sky," the 
"Uiuvu of the Sky and Sovereign of ihc (wo I'lanlis," who bears [he 



A 



144 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



papyrus scepter and holds the Key of Life. In one of her most 
frequent representations. Nut. is "she who bends herself; "being 
almost always naked, she bends her body until she touches the 
ground with the tips of her fingers, and her legs and arms seem to be 
the stands or pillars of her horizontally positioned body." In this 
posture Nut is the *Sky and beneath her lies Seb, a god of the Earth, 
with his manhood erect. This grouping leaves no doubt that Nut is 
ready to lower and spread herself on the supine god, to copulate with 
him, taking him into her flesh in the holy union of Heaven and Earth. 
Pestalozza observed quite rightly that the unwonted, inverted 
position of the goddess in the coitus hinted at a very precise meaning; 
we meet with this position not only in the Egyptian figures but also in 
the Sumerian era and even in late Paleolithic times, as has been 
shown in the bas-relief of LausseL The principle of female dominion 
has an odd, drastic expression in it. The position of the goddess 
above the god expresses the preeminence of the female principle in 
forms of civilization oriented toward rule by woman. Her dominion 
is witnessed and proclaimed in the very act that perpetuates life. 7 ' 

However, the same symbolism of inverted coitus performed by 
divine figures can be found in civilizations oriented toward rule by 
men, and then it has a totally opposite meaning. We should mention 
in passing that this type of coitus among Islamic people is marked 
with a precise symbolic context according to the proverb "Cursed be 
he who makes of woman the Sky and of man the Earth/* Whereas in 
the Hindu Indo-Tibetan world we can very often find plastic 
representations of the viparita-maiihuna or else of a kind of coitus 
characterized by the male staying still while the female moves, which 
partly repeats the situation of the Egyptian representation of Nut but 
expresses the opposite idea of male dominion. The god here is Shiva 
or another equivalent divinity of a purusha type, and his lack of 
movement expresses the character of true manhood, which, as we 
said, does not "act" in the proper meaning of the word but only 
arouses motion in prakriti, in "nature" or Shakti, which is the 
woman, so that she "moves" and develops the dynamism of creation. 
To use an apt expression of T. Burckhardt, we are dealing here with 
the "activity of the unchangeable and the passivity of the dynamic." 
Tibetan representations of the divine pair joined together in this kind 
of coitus often bear the name of "the god who possesses the 
Mother," 76 which repeals the symbolism of the incest we have 
already met in the Western hermetic traditions, likewise drawn from 
the mysteries. 77 It is worthwhile to observe next that the position of 
the viparita-maithuna belongs to a framework that is essentially holy 
and ritual. In fact, texts such as the Kamas ulrti make it clear thai thai 
position was 1101 particularly used in India in the sphere ol profane 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



145 



love, because profane relationships have no bearing on the 
symbolism proper to that position. Apart from iconographic 
representations and statues it seems to have been used, above all, as 
lata-sadhana and laia-veshtitaka in the secret rites of Tantric sexual 
magic, and not without reason. For in those rites man is believed to 
embody Shiva and thus to adopt toward woman that inwardly active 
behavior of which there is hardly a trace in the lustful rapture of the 
normal act of physical love, but which is the precise "mark" of the 
viparita~?na itkuna , 

Note how the deepest meaning of male stillness found in this 
sexual symbolism is connected to the kindred significances of 
hieratic stillness and royal stillness, both clearly reflective of 
1 ra Ei see n d e n t a I rn a n h ood . 

The Phallus and Menstruation 

We shall end this exploration by touching on two particular sides of 
the sexual sacrum. 

We shall deal first with the worship of the phallus. In the history of 
religions this worship has almost always been given a merely natural- 
istic, if not indeed obscene, meaning and has been reduced to a cult of 
fertility and pandemic begetting manhood. But such a view basically 
concerns only its most outward, degraded, and popular side. The 
phallic symbol has also expressed the principle of transcendental, 
magical, or supernatural manhood, which is something very 
different from the merely priapic varieties of male power. Thus the 
phallus was linked even to the mystery and hope of the resurrection 
and to the power that can bring it about; for this reason the phallus 
can be seen in the art of the graveyard and was often put on the tombs 
in Greece and Rome. We have already mentioned texts in which the 
ithyphallic god, or the god with erect phallus, is linked to the image 
of one in whom there rises again and is reconfirmed the nature of the 
primordial being, of Adam, of "him who cannot be broken in two/' 
In further evidence coming from the same source this being is also 
called l£ he who stayed on his feet, stays on his feet, and will stay on his 
feet," and the ithyphallic symbolism, being based on the upright, 
indeed expresses the idea of standing upright as opposed to the 
condition cf him who has fallen or been knocked down. 

The text refers explicitly to the metaphysical context indicated ear- 
(ier when it talks of "him who stood on his feet up on high in the 
power of the Godhead and who stands on his feet down here as he has 
been generated by the [image] brought by the Waters"; 78 the text 
then passes on at once to speak of the ithyphallic Hermes. In the 
ICgypliati world (in its "solar" aspects as opposed to those which 
round expression in (he symbolism of I lie "godctcKs who bends"), the 



146 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



ithyphallic god Osiris symbolized , not the fertility, birth, and death 
linked to animal procreation and to the wet principle of generation 
and desire, but resurrection from the dead. "O gods who sprang from 
the phallus, stretch forth your arms to me," reads an Egyptian 
inscription near the figure of a dead man who is rising from his grave, 
and we can also read, "O Phallus arising to slaughter those who rebel 
[against the sun god) ! By virtue of your phallus I am stronger than the 
strong and mightier than the mighty!" 79 In various statues and 
representations, Osiris himself holds or points to his phallus, 
alluding to his resurrection as a prototype for his worshippers. In 
Egypt, moreover, there existed phallic mysteries in which, as 
Diodorus Siculus tells us, those who wished to become priests of 
particular cults had to be initiated. Last, a fact especially worth 
mentioning is that the phallus or lingam in India is one of the symbols 
of Shiva and that a pendant which reproduces its shape is worn by 
ascetics as their token. This symbol relates not to Pan or to Dionysiac 
procreation but to the force of the virya or awakened manhood, 
which becomes active through ascetic detachment from the 
conditioned world. 

Now, there is a hidden connection between this meaning and the 
degradation of the same symbolism that we find in the ancient 
Roman world where the image of the phallus was used by the lower 
classes as a talisman or amulet against lucky influences and harmful 
spells — though even this echoes the significance of triumphant and 
luminous manhood, which disperses everything underhanded and 
demonic. Thus the iconography of the phallus in some temples (not 
only of Bacchus, Venus, and Priapus, but even in temples of Jove, 
Apollo, and Hermes) was present to purify and neutralize any 
adverse force. The walls of ancient Italian towns had a phallus to 
evoke a magical protective force, and the phallus as an amulet is 
widespread among other civilizations, especially in Japan. On the 
ether hand, we see the phallus represented in emperor worship after, 
as Pliny says, the emperors had already placed it before their 
triumphal chariot. But according to the ancient Roman mystical 
theology of victory, it was Jupiter, the shining uranic principle,, who 
caused emperors to be victorious. This complex, removed from the 
naturalistic and priapic, integrated the symbolism and cult of the 
phallus as known by the traditional world. But the history of 
religions only acknowledges its lowest values. Only in the decadent 
phase of classical culture did the phallus become a symbol of 
wantonness and take on an "obscene 7 * connotation. 

Turning again to Egyptian traditions, we find the myth of Osiris, 
the primordial god, who was torn to pieces. The various parts of his 
body were found and he was put together again; however, his phallus 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



147 



was never found. This dismembering symbolizes the passage from 
the world of the One to that of manifold natures and individual exist- 
ence. In the latter world, the primordial being in man tends to be 
recomposed. But still man lacks the phallus, not that of physical 
manhood but that of transcendental manhood and of creative, 
divine, and magical power. He will find it and become whole only as 
an initiate or as a "being made into Osiris." This myth of the phallus 
of Osiris is thus another thematic variant of something lost and found 
again, the holy word lost or forgotten, the true heavenly liquid 
draught no longer known, the Grail itself become invisible, and so 
on. 

The male aspect of the sexual sacrum can be contrasted with the 
ambiguous and even perilous aspect attributed to the female prin- 
ciple in a group of traditions that are in agreement with each other. It 
is not only within a background of puritanical religions hostile to sex 
that woman w T as thought of as the principle of "impurity"; the 
commandment to be "pure and innocent of woman" can certainly be 
found in a much wider system of rituals and faiths. Such "impurity" 
is not thought of in moral terms but refers to the objective and 
impersonal quality of a given influence linked to an essential side of 
female nature. The same idea lies at the bottom of various concepts 
and beliefs concerning female puberty and, above all, the menses. 

This idea may have found its most extreme expression in the prim- 
itive customs of certain savage peoples among whom young girls 
were segregated and even kept away from the group 80 at their first 
sign of puberty. They were then deemed to be "charges of a powerful 
force which, unless kept within given limits, could destroy not only 
the girl but also all the people with whom she came in contact." 
Therefore, she was considered to be taboo as the bearer of a myste- 
rious energy, which in itself was neither good nor evil but capable of 
acting in either way, depending on the applications and 
circumstances involved. The initial isolation of the girl on the 
appearance of the first menses might even be repeated at every 
occurrence. The influence was thought of as objective and almost 
"physical," so that on the first occasion her very clothes were burned 
because impregnated with that influence. 81 Among certain peoples 
the same danger and impurity were attributed to women who gave 
birth, and they were isolated and purified. Along with the shedding 
of blood and the contact with dead bodies, childbirth was similarly a 
contaminating situation that necessitated the rite of lustration. 
Women in Hellas were forbidden to give birth in the sacred 
enclosures or holy precincts of the temples. Among other peoples, 
eases nl abortion were thought to involve an especially high degree of 
danger, based on t he idea of an cucrgv dial had started to aei bill had 



148 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



not been exhausted because of the interruption of the process of 
gestation. Furthermore, the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches 
have recognized a special service, called relevailles in French, that can 
be considered "the survival of an ancient belief that a woman who 
had brought a child into the world should be cleansed, not medically, 
but religiously [spiritually]/ 1 Popular superstition here and there 
continues to hold to the idea that "if a woman has not been to church 
to be purified after childbirth, it is very dangerous for her to leave her 
home." 82 

The interesting point here is that the ambiguous and perilous side 
of the occult female substance seems connected not to the Aphroditic 
capability but to the Demeter or maternal capability of woman. This 
is confirmed by the fact that in almost all traditions, the idea of the 
magical peril acquires its greatest importance in connection with the 
menses, which is linked to the maternal and not to the Aphroditic nor 
Dionysiac capability of woman. This influence is able to paralyze 
everything sacred and strikes at the most profound nucleus of 
manhood. Thus, the Laws of Manu state that the knowledge, 
strengths force, might, and vital energy of a man who lies with a 
menstruating woman disappear wholly. North American Indians 
believe that the presence of a woman in that stale can sap the power of 
a holy man* 83 At Rome, the virgins actings as vestals had to suspend 
this task during their menstrual period; among the Mcdes, Persians, 
and Bactrians, menstruating women were isolated away from holy 
elements and especially from fire: among Greeks of the Orthodox 
church women in that condition were forbidden to communicate and 
to kiss the icons in church. In certain parts of Japan as well, they are 
strictly prohibited from visiting the temples and praying to the gods 
and the good spirits; according to the Nitya-karma and Padmapurana 
in India, the commandment is "In that period a woman must not 
think of God nor of the sun, nor of sacrifices nor prayers." Among 
The Hebrews even the death penalty was contemplated in certain 
instances for men who joined themselves in the flesh with a 
menstruating woman, and for Zoroastrians this was a sin for which 
there was no remission. The Islamic code of Sidi K he hi I said: "He 
who touches a woman during her menses to satisfy his own pleasure 
loses the force and tranquillity of the spirit." An old English rhyme, 
cited by Ellis, says: "O menstruating woman, thou'rt a fiend / From 
whom all nature should be closely screened!" 84 

An especially indicative value lies in the Hindu concept that a men- 
struating woman of any caste has the substance of an untouchable 
during her period, and this quality weakens in her only as her period 
declines. The interesting point here is that according i<i Hindu 
beliefs the untouchable represents the chaos or devilish clement, 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



149 



which is more and more curbed the higher the caste involved. In this 
context menstruation undoubtedly is connected, above all 3 to the 
negative aspect of mana, the mysterious force borne by and 
contained in woman; this aspect appears by contrast, when it 
interferes with a sacred quality having a truly supernatural manly 
character. Menstrual blood has played a part in the magic of 
incantations and love potions as well as in witchcraft. In medieval 
Europe its use in certain potions was said to have the power to make 
people idiots and hypochondriacs or, in other cases, to create mania 
and catalepsy (the same effects as found in the pathology of 
adolescence). When mixed with wine, it was supposed to make 
people walk in their sleep or go crazy with love. 85 The "superstition" 
is still widespread that when a man was made, unawares, to carry the 
menstrual blood of a woman on his person, it would bind him 
irrevocably to her. According to the gypsies, menstrual blood mixed 
with certain drinks provokes a loss of control that can cause a man to 
become alcoholic; they also believe that women who celebrate the 
Sabba on the "Mountain of the Moon" confirm their pact with the 
Devil every seven years by means of their menstrual blood. 86 
Superstition or not, the link between the substance of woman, 
through her menses, and the world of nocturnal (non-Apollonian) 
magic is significant, as are the psychically arousing and 
disintegrating influences, 87 

As with everything having the character of "man," here, too, a cer- 
tain ambivalence can be witnessed. A positive use of the perilous 
force is possible. Thus Pliny 8s wrote that favorable influences as well 
as harmful were attributed to the menses, as a power effective against 
the elements and natural phenomena. Their use for therapeutic pur- 
poses against epilepsy is mentioned. In the Getreuer Eckarik, special 
magical virtues are attributed to the first menses of a virgin, as a capa- 
bility belonging to every power when manifested for the first time. 
Among ancient Nordic populations, the Finns and Goths, it was used 
for victory in competitions, good luck in games, and counterenchant- 
ments in the hazards of navigation. 149 But in these traditions the 
unfavorable aspect of the mystery of the Mother prevails, an aspect 
that was dimly felt wherever there was an apprehension of the 
essence of its opposite (the higher values of the phallic symbol). 

All of woman's secretions have an erotic power by reason of the 
fluid that is linked to her, with the exception of menstrual material. A 
woman's period almost always exercises a decidedly antierotic effect 
on man. We may deduce a metaphysical background for this based 
on the idea that, while the Aphroditic potentiality of woman is the 
one thai corresponds lo the possibility of integration, of life-giving 
and even of ecstatic transcendence, her maternal capability, which 



150 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



has in menses and in menstrual mana its crudest manifestation , 
shows an exclusively naturalistic character and is therefore unable to 
activate the higher values enclosed in all male eros. It is claimed that 
menstruation ceases entirely in young girls employed in sexual 
magic. 

Male and Female Psychology 

We said at the beginning of this chapter that from the structures of 
the mythology of sex it would be possible to deduce the general prin- 
ciples for a psychology of man and woman. This psychology would 
be normative and deductive rather than empirical and would 
examine the fundamental morphological traits beyond any possible 
variation, modulation, or distortion due to accidental or 
environmental facts of psyche and behavior of the sexes. 

We know that up to a relatively late period the Roman Catholic 
theologians were wondering whether woman should be acknow- 
ledged to have a soul; it seems that Augustine declared, "Woman is 
not made in the image of God," The thesis that "women are not men" 
was discussed again 1 555 in the sense that they cannot be true human 
beings but must belong to another species. A like theme is found in 
Islam, while in the traditions of the Far East it was taught that 
women were not found in the "Pure Earth" or so-called Western 
Paradise because women worthy of being welcome there would first 
have to be "reborn" as men. The Council of Macon debated the 
question whether on the day of the resurrection of the flesh, 
deserving women, before passing into the Kingdom of Heaven, 
ought not to be changed into men. Consider the link between these 
ideas and those in Plato's Timaeus, where he poses the possibility 
that, owing to regression and to the identification of his spiritual 
principle with the sensitive and sensual element, a man might 
reappear on earth as a woman instead of going back to the uranic 
bein# whence he had come. 

Taken as a whole, these ideas were more than mere historical curi- 
osities. In our time Otto Weininger has taken up ideas of the same 
kind in his highly interesting application of the transcendental 
philosophy of Kant to the psychology of the sexes. The principles set 
forth in the preceding chapter may clarify the actual state of things. 
As she reflects the essence of the eternal female, each woman belongs 
ontologically to "nature" in the widest and "cosmic" but not simply 
material sense of the word (as in the Greek pkysis or nature). By 
contrast, in each man, since he embodies the opposite principle, 
there is virtually present, besides "nature," that which transcends 
nature and is higher than and prior to the Dyad. If we say that woman 
lacks a souk we have expressed nothing more than jusl thai, bin such 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



151 



a wording, of course, lends itself to ambiguity. If the word "soul" is 
taken in its original meaning of "psyche" or principle of life, it should 
signify in fact that woman not only has a soul but is eminently "soul." 
What by nature as "absolute woman" she lacks and what she cannot 
have as woman and not man is not a soul but a "spirit" (nous and not 
psyche). By "spirit" we mean here the supernatural principle that 
Roman Catholic theology refers to when it speaks of "soul" and when 
it upholds the belief that, contrary to woman, man is made in the 
image of God. It has been said that "the spirit is the male principle in 
us, whereas sensuality is the female principle." 90 We shall come back 
to the question of sensuality. Meanwhile, the point we believe settled 
is that woman is a part of "nature" (in a metaphysical sense she is a 
manifestation of the same principle as nature) and that she affirms 
nature, whereas man by virtue of birth in the masculine human form 
goes tcndentially beyond nature. 

Weininger seems to be more radical in asserting not only that 
woman has no soul but also that she has no ego or "being," and in de- 
claring the decisive factor between masculinity and femininity to be 
the possession or lack of "being." 91 The whole of this has a 
scandalous and paradoxically misogynous character only because of 
another ambiguity of words. In fact, when Weininger speaks of ego, 
he means, following the philosophy of Kant, not the psychological 
but the transcendental ego, which is apprehended by intuition and is 
above the whole world of phenomena (in metaphysical terms one 
would say "above all manifestation," like the Hindu atman); and 
when he talks of "being," all natural and empirical reality isnonbeing 
in the opinion both of Parmenides and the Vedanta. 

Whether every man in actuality has such an ego and being is an- 
other question. In fact, it is rather obvious that by far the greatest 
number of men do not possess such a principle. But that man is onto- 
logically linked to that principle, even though he has no clear aware- 
ness of it, and that, as Far Eastern traditions put it, it is the "Heavens" 
that produce men, are decisive factors for all male psychology and for 
the possibilities open in principle to man as man, whether he makes use 
of them or not. Absolute woman not only does not possess that ego 
but would not know what to do with it if she did. As she is unable 
even to conceive of it, its presence would act in a highly disturbing 
manner toward any genuine expression of her most profound nature. 

Furthermore, such an ontological status has no prejudicial effect 
on what women in some epochs and especially in the present may 
choose as I he object of their mistaken claims; a woman can build up 
an ego thai is "intellectual" and practical in the modern sense almost 
;is well as :i man by way ol a layer placed on top of her deepest nature. 
The Innate qualiiv of hciii)> cmisiihsiamial willi "nature" has not 



152 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



prevented women in past civilizations from having access to func- 
tions of a sacred character, in connection with much more interesting 
callings than those for which feminists in the West are fighting so 
hard. When writing about the mysteries of the Mother, however, we 
remarked that the "cosmic" limit is not removed with that. 
Nowadays it is hard to accept this fundamental point of the ontology 
of the sexes. As we have almost no idea of the truly supernatural, so 
the type of the absolute man has almost disappeared, Borders that 
were clearly demarcated in other times have today become unstable 
through disintegration. 

The symbolism of the W T aters and lunar changeability, which are 
essentially related to the female archetype, also give us the key to the 
most elementary psychology of woman. But we must underline here 
a basic point of a general kind; the characteristics with which we shall 
deal now and hereafter do not concern a person as such; they are not 
"qualities of character" or "moral qualities" for which one or another 
female individual is responsible. Instead, they are objective elements 
working in individuals almost as impersonally as the chemical prop- 
erties inherent in a particular substance. It is effectively "nature 
proper" which acts in a more or less exact and constant manner. So 
let it be said once and for all that it makes no sense to formulate value 
judgements or to speak of "good" or "bad." 

Having made this point, it would be trivial to dwell on the 
fickleness, changeability, and unsteadiness of female character (and 
also of male character wherever man has something of woman in him) 
as the outcome of her "wet" (watery) and "lunar" nature. This 
"essential deduction" was already known to some authors of the 
Middle Ages. Thus a certain Cecco of Ascoli gave the following 
explanation for the lack of "steadiness" in women and for their 
shifting now here and now there like the wind: "Each of them, of 
course, is wet, and wetness does not keep its form"; and he links to 
the same cause another female trait with which we shall deal shortly: 
"Broken faith is in her by nature." 92 

Furthermore, we may also point to the prevalence in female psy- 
chology of the emotional part, which has passive, "lunar," and dis- 
continuous characteristics. As a physiological counterpart, the great 
changeability of woman's expressions, which belong only to her sur- 
face, is the changeability of a in ask without any d^p counterpart. 
which would in any case be impossible. Here it is almost a question of 
movable surface waves that do not "penetrate" into the 
physiognomy, as happens in the male mask; in this there is more 
mobility than true expressiveness of character, linked to a greater 
neuromuscular ability to become excited; here we may think of how 
women blush and smile. It is lor this reason, too, thai the art at which 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



153 



women excel most is that of the theater and that in every actor there is 
always something feminine. 93 

In a wider context, it is necessary to consider what arises, for a 
woman, from the fact that she reflects the cosmic female according to 
its aspect as material receiving a form that is external to her and that 
she does not produce from within (natura natural a or natura 
signata — "natured nature 5 ' or "impressed nature"). This gives rise to 
the great suppleness, credulity, impressionability, and adaptability 
of the female psyche and woman's natural disposition to accept and 
assimilate ideas and forms coming to her from outside, although a 
possible rigidity may follow the reception of ideas due precisely to the 
passive way she has adopted them, which may appear under the guise 
of conformity and conservatism. In this way, we can explain the 
apparent contrast inherent in the fact that female nature is 
changeable, yet women mainly show conservative tendencies 
sociologically and a dislike for the new. 94 This can be linked to their 
role in mythology as female figures of a Demeter or chthonic type 
who guard and avenge customs and the law — the law of blood and of 
the earth, but not the uranic law* This aspect is reflected on the 
biological plane in Darwin's observation that the female tends to 
preserve and lead back to the average type of the species, whereas the 
male has a greater power of physio-anatomical variation. Here we are 
faced with two opposed kinds of changeability. One of them, female 
changeability, springs from the material and plastic principle and has 
as its counterpart the force of inertia or static fixedness as soon as the 
material has been "shaped" (the Demeter aspect of the female, 
opposed to the Aphrodite aspect). The other, male changeability, is 
instead linked to the creative "seminar' principle, which is a 
principle of activity in a free and proper sense. The contrast between 
the two aspects of female nature, fickleness and inconstancy 
alongside conservativism, is therefore only an apparent one. 

Of those modern writers who have tackled sexual psychology, 
Weininger is perhaps the only one who has risen above the level of 
banality. We can refer to him again for some other essential points. 
First, Weininger established an organic relationship between 
memory, logic, and ethics on the basis of the link between each one of 
them and the "transcendental ego." This concerns essentially the 
psychic structure of the absolute man. "Being" tends to support its 
own unity in the world of "becoming." On the psychological plane 
this is revealed in the memory, which, as a synthetic function, 
opposes itself to the dispersion of consciousness in the fluid and 
instantaneous multiplicity of the contents of that consciousness; on 
die plane nf I he intellect, I he same impulse is shown in logic, which 
h:is as iis b:«sis (he principle til identity: A equals /I . The ideal ol logic 



154 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



is to bring the unlike back to one. As such, both memory and a logical 
nature have a guiding ethical value because they express the 
resistance of being, its effort to stand upright, identical to itself, and 
to assert itself in the stream of inner and outer phenomena. 
According to Weininger, as the absolute woman is devoid of being, 
she could have neither memory, logic, nor ethics. Incapable of a 
logical or an ethical imperative, she would be wholly ignorant of the 
precise, vigorous, imperative nature of the purely intellectual 
function of judgment, which has a distinctly male character. 95 
Bergson distinguished between two separate kinds of memory. One 
is the "vital" and is linked to "duration," or the flow of experience 
(this memory is connected to the subconscious and at given times 
throws up distant recoiled ions unexpectedly and involuntarily; the 
same memory may recall the whole content of a life instantaneously 
when death threatens). The other memory is determined, organized, 
and dominated by the intellect. Woman lacks this second memory 
owing to her "fluid" lunar nature, whereas she may be more 
generously endowed with the first kind than man. But the first 
memory lacks the ethical capability of which we spoke earlier, and it 
proceeds not by the presence but by the lack of a "transcendental 
ego." 

We have to bear in mind two differing sides of logic. We are not 
dealing with everyday logic, which woman, when necessary, knows 
how to use "instrumentally" with undoubted ability and ingenuity, 
even if the method is not straightforward but polemical and fleeting, 
like a guerrilla or a sophist. Instead, we are dealing with logic as a love 
of pure truth and inward coherence, which leads to a strict and im- 
personal style of thought that constitutes a sort of inner imperative 
for the absolute man. Woman is almost incapable of this logic, and it 
does not interest her. She has as a substitute her intuitive and sensi- 
tive qualities, which are linked to the fluid element of life, the yin 
aspect, as opposed to the precise, steadfast, enlightened, Apollonian 
(but often also dry as dust) forms of nous (perception) and logos 
(reason), the male intellectual principle. 

Weininger's statement that the absolute woman is not aware of the 
ethical imperative has a greater weight. Woman, insofar as she is 
woman, will never know ethics in the categorical sense of pure inner 
law detached from every empirical, cudemonistic, sensitive, sen- 
timental, and personal connection. Nothing in woman that may have 
an ethical character can be separated from instinct, sentiment, 
sexuality, or "life"; it can have no relationship with pure "being." It 
will almost always have a naturalistic character or will be a 
sublimation with a naturalistic content, as we shall see when we come 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



155 



to deal with the traditional ethics of the mother or female lover. Apart 
from this, the question here is not of an ethical nature but, at most, of 
morality, which in woman is a superficial thing, received from the 
world of man and often only conformist. This is the way we should 
think, for instance, about female ideas regarding "honor" and 
"virtue" and many other qualities in "social ethics," which are not 
true ethics but mere habits (of the Demeter woman as the guardian of 
habit). Woman may even prize in man some qualities that have an 
ethical value: justice very seldom, but often heroism, the power of 
command and decision, and in certain cases even an ascetic 
disposition. But that feminine recognition is concerned not with the 
inner ethical element of such behavior but with the personal quality 
that is sexually attractive in a particular man. In other words, these 
qualities meet with a response from the sexuality of woman and not 
from an ethical nature. 

That telling lies is an essential characteristic in female nature has 
been acknowledged at all times and in all places by popular wisdom. 
Weininger relates this trait likewise to the absence of being in the ab- 
solute woman. In fact we can see in this a disposition that is a special, 
possible outcome of the existential weakness of woman, a weakness 
that reflects that of her "raw material" or of ule (matter), which ac- 
cording to Plato and Aristotle is the principle of the "unlike," non- 
identical, alteration and "decline." W T eininger observed that nothing 
is more baffling for a man than a woman's response when caught in a 
lie, When asked why she is lying, she is unable to understand the 
question, acts astonished, bursts out crying, or seeks to pacify him by 
smiling* 96 She cannot understand the ethical and transcendental side 
of lying or the fact that a lie represents damage to being and, as was 
acknowledged in ancient Iran, constitutes a crime even worse than 
killing. It is nonsense to deduce this trait in women from sociological 
factors; some people say that a lie is the "natural weapon" of the 
woman and therefore used in her defense for hundreds of years. The 
truth, pure and simple, is that woman is prone to lie and to disguise 
her true self even when she has no need to do so; this is not a social 
trait acquired in the struggle for existence, but something linked to 
her deepest and most genuine nature. Just as the absolute woman 
does not truly feel that lying is wrong, so in her, contrary to man, 
lying is not wrong, nor is it an inner yielding or a breaking oi her own 
existential law. It is a possible counterpart of her plastic and fluid 
nature. A type such as D'Aurevilly described is perfectly 
understandable: "She made a habit of lying to the point where it 
became truth; ii was so simple and natural, without any effort or 
iillcclalion." Il is foolish lo judge woman wilh ihe values of the 



156 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



absolute man even in cases where, by doing violence to her own self, 
she makes a show of following those values and even sincerely 
believes that she is following them. 

Woman as Mother and Woman as Lover 

We said earlier that in the sphere of manifestation and nature, the 
male is metaphysically the complementary correlative of the female, 
but beyond that, he also reflects the character of that which is higher 
and earlier than the Dyad. The outcome on the human plane is that, 
whereas all relationships based on the Dyad have an essential charac- 
ter for woman and fulfill the natural law of her being, the same is not 
true for man insofar as he is truly man. Such relationships are the 
sexual ones in a strict sense, and the relationships between mother 
and son as well. It is not wrong to say that in every higher civilization 
man has never been deemed to be truly a man as long as he submits to 
the double bond of mother and wife and exhausts the sense of his own 
existence in that sphere. We mentioned earlier that in the very rites of 
passage or of puberty among primitive peoples the consecration of 
manhood and admission to a "society of men" were shown as a 
surpassing of that naturalistic sphere. Rachel said in the Bible, "Give 
me a son or else I shall die." There are Buddhist texts that underline 
the "inexorable nature" of woman as regards motherhood and 
sexuality, of which she can never have enough. 97 Not so much as a 
person, but rather owing to a metaphysical impulse, woman will 
always tend to lead man back under the yoke of eros or domesticity. 
In characterizing man and woman, Weiningcr was right to say that 
absolute woman is nothing but sexuality, whereas the true man "is 
sexual but something else as well." We concur with that writer in 
seeing the profound symbolic meaning in the anatomical and bodily 
facts that the male sexual organs seem to be something limited, 
detached, and almost added on to the rest of man's body from the 
outside, whereas the sexual organs of a woman go deep into her 
innermost flesh. As there exists in man a certain gap between himself 
and sexuality, he can "know" his own sexuality, whereas woman can 
be unaware of it and deny it, for she is nothing other than sexuality 
and is sexuality itself. 98 A Hindu name for woman is kamini or "she 
who is made of desire," and that expresses the same meaning as the 
old Latin proverb "Tom mulier sem$" "The whole of woman is sex." 
Among other things, there is a Jink between that and the provocative 
character often shown, without the least intention, by very young 
and "innocent" women and even by baby girls. We should note, 
next, in a not dissimilar context, a special and almost unconscious 
narcissism within every woman which lies in her feeling of ihc 
potential pleasure thai she can constitute for man. This she can relish 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



157 



by imagining that pleasure, even outside of any real sexual relations. 
Moreover, Ellis was right when he wrote that woman thrives on 
sexuality and motherhood, which make her proper being function. 
There is no correlative of this for man (Let us add, unless he reaches in 
some way the higher dimensions of sexual experience); on the 
Aphroditie side, the counterpart in man may rather be a certain loss 
of manhood, even if we leave aside the occult question, with which 
we shall deal in the next section." On the Demeter side, the obscure 
and predominant desire of woman to be a mother does not meet in 
man a kindred elementary need to beget. Where such a desire exists 
in man, it belongs to a different plane, which is ethical rather than 
naturalistic (the idea of the continuation of the stock, family or caste, 

and soon). 

What the Greeks called "heterity," that is, being connected to 
another or being centered on someone other than oneself, is a charac- 
teristic proper to the cosmic female, whereas to have one's own prin- 
ciple in oneself is proper to the pure male. At the psychological level 
that fact leads to qualities in woman which can be readily seen in 
everyday life: female life is almost always devoid of an individual 
value but is linked to someone else in her need, born of vanity, to be 
acknowledged, noticed, flattered, admired, and desired (this 
extroverted tendency is connected to that "looking outside" which 
on a metaphysical level has been attributed to Shakti). The practice 
of wooing, gallantry, and compliments (even insincere ones) would 
be inconceivable if separated from the obligatory basis consisting 
precisely of this inborn trait of the female psyche, which man has had 
to keep in mind at all times and in all places. Let us remark in passing 
that the values of female ethics are very different from those of male 
ethics, and this can be seen at once in the fact that a woman ought to 
despise a man for such fawning behavior, which is often pursued just 
to possess her body; yet exactly the opposite happens. 

The two basic capabilities of feminine nature are determined on a 
less frivolous plane, one corresponding to the Aphrodite and the 
other to the Demeter archetype, namely woman as lover and as 
mother. In both cases we have to deal with a being, a will, an 
attainment to self-confirmation that depend on someone else, either 
lover or child. This fulfills the being of woman at a profane level (but 
will continue to a great extent at the sacred level). From the 
viewpoint of moral obligation, her law and her possible ethics are 
determined within this framework. 

We owe to Weiningcr once again a classical typological and exis- 
(cnlicil description of these two fundamental capabilities of female 
nature. Bui, as with all of whal thai writer says about woman, here 
wcmusl discriminate the real from I he distorted , which springs from 



158 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



his unconscious misogynous complex with its rather puritanical 
basis. Indeed, Weininger sees the fundamental womanly capability 
in "prostitution," to which he gives a deprecatory and degraded 
meaning. Instead, we are dealing here with the pure type of female 
lover and her corresponding Aphroditic calling, and professional 
prostitution does not enter into the question at all, unless in a very 
minor and conditioned way, for prostitution is often made necessary 
by environmental, financial, and social circumstances without being 
linked to an inner predilection for it. At the most, we might talk here 
of the type of ancient or Oriental courtesan or of the "Dionysiac" 
woman. Every true man knows at once that there is a contrast or 
antagonism between the real Aphrodite attitude of woman and the 
maternal attitude. At their ontological bases these two opposed types 
are reconnected to the two main conditions of the '"raw material/' to 
its pure and dynamically formless state tied to and oriented toward a 
form and nurturing a form. Now that this point has been cleared up, 
the differential characterization of Weininger can be accepted as 
accurate; it is the relationship with procreation and with the child 
that distinguishes the two opposite types. The "mother" type seeks 
man for the child, whereas the "lover" type seeks him for the erotic 
experience by itself (in lower forms, for "pleasure"). Thus the 
maternal type fits specially into the natural order of things — if we 
wish to refer to the biological myth, we can say that that type fits into 
the law and end- purpose of the species — whereas the pure "lover" 
type transcends this order in a certain way (a meaningful sign is the 
sterility often found in the types of the pure lover and the 
"prostitute"), 100 and we would say that, rather than a principle that 
befriends and affirms the physical, earthly life, the lover type is 
potentially hostile to that life because of the virtual content of 
transcendency proper to the absolute display of eros. 101 Thus, 
although it may disappoint bourgeois morality, it is not as a mother 
but as a lover that woman can approach a higher order in a natural 
way, that is, not on the basis of ethics but merely by arousing a 
spontaneous disposition of her being. However, an ambiguity lies at 
the base of the statement that the maternal type should feel a 
strengthening of existence in coitus whereas the Aphrodite type 
should have a desire to feel herself destroyed, annihilated, and 
crushed by pleasure, 102 But this is wrong from two points of view: 
first because the "deadly rapture of love" as a wish to destroy and be 
destroyed in ecstasy is quite common in both man and woman in all 
strong and higher forms of erotic experience; and second because the 
aforesaid disposition of the lover concerns at most the superficial 
psychic layers of the Virgin or Durga substance of the Aphroditic 
woman, and the opposite is true on a more profound plane. 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



.159 



But whether a woman is of the mother type or the lover type, exis- 
tential anguish, fear of loneliness, and the feeling of an uneasy empti- 
ness if she does not possess a man are characteristic of her. The social 
and even financial conditions that often seem to form the basis of that 
feeling are actually circumstances that only favor its existence but do 
not cause it. Instead, its deepest root is precisely the essential de- 
pendence of woman on another being, the feeling of "matter" and of 
Penia, who without the "other" and without "form" is nothingness 
and therefore, when left by herself, experiences the fear of nothing- 
ness. Weininger assigns to this metaphysical content also the 
frequent behavior of woman in coitus: "The supreme moment in the 
life of a woman, when her original being and elementary pleasure are 
revealed, is the moment when she feels the male seed running inside 
her; she then embraces the man tempesiuously and hugs him to her; 
it is the supreme delight of passivity. ... the matter which, indeed, 
is formed and does not wish to abandon form but to keep it 
everlastingly bound to herself."' 05 The situation is the same for a 
woman nearer to the Durga type when, at the same moment, she does 
not embrace but is almost motionless and her face shows the feelings 
of an ambiguous ecstasy that have something of the inscrutable smile 
of some Buddhas and of certain Khmer heads. It is at that time thai 
she receives something more than just the material seed and that she 
absorbs the vitya, the magical manhood, the being of the male. It is 
here that we meet the aspirating quality, that "draining death which 
comes from woman" of which we spoke in company with xWeyrink in 
connection with the occult side of every normal lustful coitus, a side 
that may find its symbolic manifestation and echo in the physical 
outward appearance. 

What D'Annunzio said in his // Fubco (Fire) about one of his 
female characters — "as if the whole body of the woman had assumed 
the quality of a sucking mouth"— not only takes place on a subtle 
plane but in reality makes the erotic practice of fellatio seem the best 
expression of the ultimate essence of woman. Actually, the ancient 
world had already recognized a special active participation of woman 
in coitus, and Aristotle talked of her aspirating the seminal fluid. 104 
This theory was taken up again by Fichstcdt toward the middle of 
last century and is now acknowledged to be accurate as regards its 
physiological side; the existence is admitted of rhythmic contractions 
of the vagina and uterus, like an aspiration or suction, and of 
spasmodic automatic movements with their own special wavelike 
contractions based on particular slow rhythmic tonic waves and 
having, in fact, the function of absorption by aspirating or sucking. 
I'll is bodily behavior can be ascertained now only in highly sexed 
women* hill (he people ol'aiiciriil limes were rij»lu in deeming h lobe 



160 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



a general phenomenon. In fact, we believe that during the course of 
history a physiological atrophy has occurred in feminine sexuality, 105 
In Oriental women, who are closest to the ancient type, this 
physiological behavior in coitus is still almost normal and is joined to 
physiological capabilities that have become unusual in European 
women, who nevertheless must have possessed them in ancient 
times. I 06 We are dealing in this regard with a physical symbol or 
reflection of an essential significance. At this level of physical reflex, 
the comparison with sucking has a liminal expression in a fact that 
still remains physiologically obscure, namely the smell of sperm 
which sometimes is given off by a woman far from her genital parts 
shortly after coitus; a poet, Arturo Qnofri, even went so far as to 
speak of a "spermatic smile." 

Pity, Sexuality, and Cruelty in Woman 

A Persian legend indicates the ingredients of which a woman is com- 
posed as "the hardness of a diamond, ihc sweetness oi' honey, the 
cruelty of a tiger, the warm brightness of a fire, and the coolness of 
snow." These ambivalences, the same as those met with in the arche- 
type of the Divine Woman, lie at the basis of another set of traits in 
feminine psychology: the coexistence of a disposition toward pity 
and a disposition toward a special cruelty. Lombroso and Ferrer© ob- 
served some time ago how woman is simultaneously more pitying 
and yet more cruel than man, for her capacity for a loving protection 
and compassion is often accompanied by a lack of feeling, ruthless- 
ness, and destructive violence that, once let loose, take a far greater 
hold on her than they do on man; history bears witness to this in col- 
lective forms when rebellions and lynching have taken place, 107 As it 
is obvious and rather trivial for us, in company with the two writers 
just cited, to link feminine pity to the maternal disposition or 
Demeter element in woman, her cruelty must instead be explained 
by referring to another of her aspects, namely to the most profound 
essence of female sexuality. 

The link between cruelty and sexuality was dramatized even in 
classical antiquity in the type of the bacchante and maenad. How- 
ever, it is important to note the presence of this characteristic (which 
is not unrelated to the "sucking" quality mentioned earlier) behind 
even the profane and not just the exalted forms of feminine sexuality. 
This is the "cold" dimension of woman as an earthly and human 
embodiment of the "Virgin," of Durga and ssymi and it is here that 
the characteristics shown by the most superficial psychology of the 
sexes are inverted. We must distinguish two forms of the Aphrodkic 
female type. The lower of these is "female" in a primitive or 
"DionyMiac" sense, in the popularly accepted meaning of ihe word. 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



161 



whereas the higher form by contrast has subtle, remote, ambiguous, 
and apparently chaste features. The figure of Dolores was called 
"Our Lady of the Spasm" and "daughter of Death and Priapus" by 
Swinburne, who wrote with reference to her: "I penetrated by the 
last portal as far as the chapel where sin is a prayer; what does it 
matter if the rite is mortal, O Lady of the Spasm? What does it 
matter? The last goblet that we were emptying is all yours, O terrible 
and wanton Dolores, Our Lady of the Spasm," This characterization 
is mostly the cerebral surmise of a decadent and "perverted" literary 
romanticism. 108 However, we arc getting nearer to actual 
circumstances when D'Annunzio writes, "Cruelty is latent at the 
base of her love, he thought. There is something destructive in her, 
which becomes more evident as her excitement amid the caresses 
grows stronger . . . and he saw again in his memory the fearful 
image, almost like a Gorgon, of the woman as she had appeared to 
him on several occasions, between his half-shut eyelids, convulsed in 
a spasm or inert in his extreme weakness" (from his Trionfo delta 
morte). 109 This cruelty is not due to inversion or to a masculine trait in 
women: indeed the opposite is the case. The fact is that, however 
sweet and loving she may be, every woman's expression has, in 
moments of desire, something cruel, hard, and ruthless; along with 
sweetness and tenderness and abandonment coexist an insensitivity 
and a subtle selfishness beyond the personal essential relationship 
with her elementary Durga substance as lover. Viazzi rightly noted 
that such traits are not foreign even to the most ideal type of girl, the 
romantic Mimi as Murger described her: "She was twenty- 
two. . . . Her face was like a sketch of an aristocratic figure; but her 
very refined lineaments, sweetly brightened by the sparkling of her 
clear blue eyes, took on, at certain moments of boredom and ill 
temper, a character of almost savage brutality, such that a 
physiognomist would perhaps have seen the signs of a profound 
selfishness and a great lack of feeling." And Viazzi noted how often 
this sign appears "in the most genuine attitudes of a woman in 
love."' 10 The subtlest and deepest feelings in a woman's 
"abandonment" are seldom understood or seen. But it was a woman 
and, moreover, a psychoanalyst who commented, "It is rather 
seldom that we meet men who stay cold in an erotic situation, 
whereas there are numerous women who are as cold as stockbrokers 
even when in an erotic relationship. The coldness of the moon and 
the hard-heartedness of the Moon Goddess symbolize this side of 
female nature. Notwithstanding its lack of warmth and feeling, and 
perhaps even owing to its indifference, this impersonal eroticism in 
woman is often hi tractive lo man." 1 " 

Besides, it would be hard lo sav whether outside economic and 



162 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



social circumstances alone determine the fact that, in spite of every- 
thing, a woman in love can aim at a positive and practical objective. 
She may show, more than man. a calculating attitude that can be as- 
signed to an instinctive nature and an irresponsible search for plea- 
sure. Leaving that aside, the element of cruelty and coldness in 
woman can be shown on the moral plane, for if there are some women 
who are proud of a heroic man and the extraordinary deeds he does 
for love of her (because these deeds enhance her worth indirectly), 
there is also the type who deems her lover's renunciation of all higher 
manly valor and his possible fall into ruin on her behalf the strongest 
proof of his love for her. One of Don Byrne's characters said that the 
man who lost himself wholly in a woman was not a man, however 
strong his love for her; the woman would despise him. But the 
woman in the book retorted that it was true that the woman would 
despise him but that she would also love him all the more. It was not 
in regard to the so-called vamp but in general that Remarque adopted 
the fable of a rocky boulder that the wave loved: "The wave foamed 
and whirled around the boulder and kissed it day and night, and 
hugged it with her white arms and begged it to come to her. She loved 
it and tossed around it and in this way slowly sapped it; until one day 
the boulder was wholly worn away at its bottom and yielded and fell 
into the arms of the wave. And for some time there was no longer any 
boulder to play with or love or dream of There was only a stone 
drowned at the bottom of the sea. The wave felt disappointed and set 
herself to look for another rock." Women, wrote Martin, are ruthless 
about the evil they do to men they love. 

The Fascination of Woman and Activity and Passivity in Sexual 
Love 

The metaphysical trait of the eternal woman as witch, as Maya and 
maya-shakti, the cosmogonic enchantment of the One, corresponds 
in general to female fascination. The association of the Aphrodite 
type with the type of the witch is often to be found in myth and saga. 
Both aspects were assigned, for instance, to Calypso, Circe, Medea, 
Isolde, and even Brunhilda in some versions of the saga. At Rome, 
Venus Verticordia was conceived of as skilled in the arts of magic, 
Minoan figures of women with magic wands in their hands are well 
known. A great deal of similar evidence could be readily collected. 
That woman is more closely linked to "earth," the cosmic and natural 
element, is demonstrated on the material plane by the various effects 
that she undergoes owing to the periodic rhythms of the cosmos. In 
times of yore, however, this link was referred more to the yin aspect 
of nature, to the nocturnal and unconscious supersensual field, irra- 
tional and unfathomable, of the vital forces, Whence there arise in 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



163 



woman certain powers of magic and prophecy in a restricted sense 
(opposed to the male and Apollonian characteristics of high magic 
and theurgy), which are liable to degenerate into witchcraft, In the 
trials of the Inquisition, by comparison with men, women figure as 
the accused in the overwhelming majority of cases; in ad. 1500, 
Bodin reported fifty trials of women and only one of a man relating to 
witchcraft and the occult arts. One of the most widely read treatises 
of those times on the subject of devils , the Malleus maleficarum 
(Hammer of the Witches;:, dwells at great length on why witchcraft 
was undertaken mainly by women. In the traditions of many peoples, 
this type of magic is related to an archaic feminine and lunar 
tradition. It is of interest that in China the character wu 9 used to 
designate a person who exercised the arts of magic in a strict or 
"shamamc" sense, was originally applied only to females. The 
techniques employed by the wu to contact supersensual forces were 
sometimes ascetic and at other times orgiastic; in the latter case it 
seems that in the beginning the wu officiated wholly naked. The wu 
had to have youth and fascinating beauty as preliminary 
qualifications for her work, and the meanings of the characters yao 
and tniao as "queer" "disquieting," and "mysterious" refer to the 
type and qualities of the wu} u One text says that the nonuranic 
forces brought down by their rites "eclipsed the sun." 

But what interests us here apart from these specific references to 
the supersensual is the magic of woman and the sense of her natural 
fascination and power of seduction. We find the following sentence 
in Daudet: "I felt myself invincibly attracted by her; only an abyss 
can cause such fascination." We dealt earlier with the symbolism and 
the rite of disrobing and discussed the ultimate expression that this 
process had, for women, in such forms as the dance of the seven veils. 
We are concerned here with a woman stripped not of the material 
clothes that hide her body but of her individual identity as an 
empirical being and particular personality, until she can be seen in 
her elementary and uttermost substance as the Virgin, as Durga, as 
the woman prior to the manifold varieties of mortal women. The 
fascination exercised by all female nakedness in its final root is that it 
hints in an obscure way, which only the senses perceive, at this other 
nakedness. It is not a question of "beauty" or of an animal summons 
of the flesh; and what Paul Valery wrote is only partly right: "The 
influence of nakedness should of necessity arise from the value of the 
'hidden' and of the accompanying peril imparted to it by its quality of 
ill-omened revelation and deadly means of seduction." It is true that 
die fascination of woman's nakedness has a dizzying aspect like that 
caused by emptiness and ilic bottomless, under ihc sign of Ytlt\ the 
raw material ul" creation, and of the ambiguily nfils nonheing. This 



164 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



165 



characteristic belongs to female nakedness alone. The effect of the 
naked male on woman is not only small in comparison but, where it 
exists, is of a special kind and essentially physical and phallic; it only 
effects her in the trivial meaning of a suggestion of the muscular and 
animal efficiency of the "male." Not so in woman; in a fully naked 
woman Durga is dimly felt by the man; she, goddess of orgiastic 
festivals, is the "inaccessible," the Prostitute and the Mother who is 
also the Virgin, the Inviolable, the Inexhaustible. It is precisely this 
which awakens in man an elementary desire united with vertigo; it is 
this, too, which drives desire to a paroxysm, accelerating the rhythm 
until priapic man precipitates himself into the subtle and sucking 
ecstasy of the motionless woman. If man in general finds pleasure in 
defloration and rape, everything that in that pleasure can be related 
to the instinct or pride of first possession is only a surface element; 
the deepest factor is the feeling, even if only illusory, that the 
physical act gives him of violating the inviolable and of possessing her 
whom, in her ultimate root, in her "nakedness," will never be 
possessed by the lust of the flesh; it is the desire to possess this 
"virgin" that acts obscurely in the desire to possess the physically 
intact woman or the woman who resists. Moreover, there is no 
difference between that and the root of a specific element of sadism, 
which is linked to the act of defloration and also exists in almost every 
coitus; it is different from the ambivalent "algolagnia" of which we 
spoke earlier and is much more profound; this cruelty and ferocity 
act as a counterpart to the transcendental and fascinating 
intangibility, "coldness," and insatiability that belong to the 
elementary female substance. There is a wish to "kill" the hidden and 
absolute woman contained in every female being, and a futile sadistic 
desire for "possession."* 1 * It is for this reason, too, that, as a rule, 
nothing stirs a man more than feeling the woman utterly exhausted 
beneath his own hostile rapture in the coitus. 

When treating the myth of Pandora, Kierkegaard 114 wrote that the 
last gifts, to crown all others, donated by the envious gods to the 
"woman of desire" sent to Epimetheus so as to strengthen her power 
were her innocence, modesty, and resistance. We said before that 
modesty in woman has a character that is not ethical but merely func- 
tional and sexual; it would be equally banal to show that all shyness 
and resistance in woman most often have a similar functional purpose 
of sexual excitation. 115 These features play a great part in the 
field of individual conscious behavior. Moreover, beyond the 
flirtation sness, modesty, and rationalizing devices used in presenting 
herself and proper to accomplished femininity, there is a more subtle 
and impersonal factor that consists of the fascinating sexual element 
belonging lo innocence and chaslity. A woman who shows her desire 



openly can surprise and even disgust any man who has more than a 
merely animal nature and who, instead, is attracted by innocence, 116 
because the "pure" girl embodies to a greater extent a challenge for 
man inherent in the Durga substance. We ought to examine an 
objective and impersonal side of this general effect. Ignorance of 
occult law obscures recognition of the true meaning of female purity 
and the secret of her potential fascination. This law requires that all 
inhibited or withheld energy be strengthened by translation into a 
more subtle and invisible influence that is nevertheless more 
efficient. Hindu terminology calls it transmutation into ojas force. 
Well, in normal purity and chastity, there is no evidence of the 
"inborn tendency of womanly nature toward purity" imagined by 
some Roman Catholic writers who have forgotten the very different 
views of their predecessors. In any event, woman continues to be the 
kamini, she who has sexuality as her substance, she who, beyond the 
threshold of her most peripheral consciousness, "thinks about sex, 
thinks of sex, thinks sex, delights in sex." She shows the impersonal, 
"natural" inhibition of this disposition in the form of a subtle, 
magical power that forms the special aura of fascination that 
surrounds the "chaste" and "innocent" kind and has a greater effect 
on every differentiated man than any coarsely sensual feminine 
behavior. It is precisely when no trick or conscious moralistic 
inhibition is in question and when we are only dealing with her 
elementarily existential nature, whose root is the archetype, that 
woman has at her disposal this more dangerous force. 1 17 

This leads us to one last fundamental point concerning the less vis- 
ible side of the ordinary relations between the sexes. If, from a 
metaphysical point of view, the male corresponds to the active and 
the female to the passive principle, such relationships are universally 
inverted in so-called natural sexuality. The man very seldom goes to 
the woman as a bearer of the pure principle of "being" or as an 
emanation of the power of the One but, as a rule, seems to "undergo" 
the magic of the woman. The relationships are inverted and are 
shown in a meaningful way by a dictum of Titus Burckhardt that 
woman is actively passive, whereas man is passively active. The 
"actively passive" quality is the substance of woman's fascination 
and is activity in a higher sense. Common parlance alludes to this in 
attributing the power of "attraction" to a woman, this attraction 
being the power of the magnet. In such a regard, woman is active and 
man is passive. "It is said and generally admitted that in the struggle 
for love woman is almost passive; but this passivity is far from real. It 
is tile passivity of I lie magnet, whose apparent stillness attracts iron 
Into its viiiiex."" s It is remarkable that within the strongly 
paliiaivlial social sysieni ol the l«ur Knsi n ilicre was a I radii ion thai 



. 



166 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



knew the concept of "acting without acting" {wei-wu-wei) and 
understood that "in her apparent passivity and inferior status the 
femaJe is superior to the male/' 119 Paradoxical though it may seem, it 
is always man who is "seduced'' in the strict, etymological meaning of 
the word; his active enterprise is reduced to that of approaching a 
magnetic field, the force of which he will undergo as soon as he has 
come within its orbit. 12 ° Woman always and decisively has the upper 
hand over any man who desires, that is, over mere masculine sexual 
need. Rather than give herself, she "makes herself be taken.'' A. 
Channel in his Dernikre semaine de Don Juan gave meaningful 
expression to this: all the women Don Juan had possessed were 
revealed as being so many different aspects of one single woman 
without a face (the eternal feminine or Durga) who had really wanted 
the words and gestures with which he had "seduced" each one of 
them. He had desired these women "just as iron desires the magnet." 
It was by making Don Juan aware of this that the Commendatory 
made him kill himself. 

Thus priapic man is quite deluded when he assumes and boasts 
that he has "possessed" a woman just because he has been lying with 
her. The pleasure a woman feels in being "possessed" is an elemen- 
tary characteristic; "She is not taken but welcomes and, in 
welcoming, wins and absorbs" (G. Piston i). L2! For this there is also a 
biological analogy in what happens between germinal cells: the 
movement, activity, and initiative of the fertilizing spermatozoon, 
itself lacking vital substance and nutritive plasma, succeeds in 
overcoming all the other spermatozoa poured into the vagina. It 
penetrates the attracting ovum, almost motionless and rich with vital 
foods; it opens a breach, which shuts behind it, imprisoning it as 
soon as penetration is completed; after that there occurs the mutual 
destruction of the two kinds of cells, male and female, which have 
come into contact inside the womb. The woman knows a yielding so 
full that it should be deemed more active than the onslaught of the 
man, as Aldous Huxley said. Lastly, if we examine the experience of 
coitus in its innermost psychological side, the situation of the 
"magnet" is very often repeated; in fact, it seems that the most 
differentiated man is mainly passive in the sense that he forgets 
himself, and all his attention, as if he were fascinated, is drawn 
irresistibly to the psychic and physical conditions that are brought 
about in woman during coitus, especially as they arc reflected on her 
physiognomy ("the tragic mask of her, laboring under the rhythmic 
caress" — A. Koestler); and it is precisely this that forms the strongest 
aphrodisiac for man's rapture and orgasm. 

In the Mediterranean cycle of the Great Goddess, the "nonacting" 
power or magic of woman was represented by I'otniu Therm i or 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



167 



Queen of the Wild Beasts, a goddess who rode a bull or held him on 
the leash, and Cybele, who had herself drawn in a chariot by two 
tame lions as a symbol of her sovereignty; Durga seated on a lion with 
a rein in her hands is the corresponding Hindu goddess. The same 
theme crops up in the kabbalistically inspired symbolism of card XI 
in the game of Tarot, where Force is shown with the figure of a 
woman who is holding the jaws of a raging lion open without any 
effort. Every woman, inasmuch as she shares in the "absolute 
woman," possesses that force to a certain extent. Man knows it, and 
often owing to a neurotic unconscious overcompensation for his 
inferiority complex, he flaunts before woman an ostentatious 
manliness, indifference, or even brutality and disdain. 122 But this 
secures him the advantage, on the contrary. The fact that woman 
often becomes a victim on an external, material, senti menial, or social 
level, giving rise to her instinctive "fear of loving," does not alter the 
fundamental structure of the situation. 

On a subtle plane, the passivity of man increases the more the 
material aspects of the "male" and the instinctive violent and sensual 
traits of manhood are predominant in him. As a rule, the man poorest 
in inner manliness is the very type that the Western world has 
adopted as the ideal of manhood, The activist man busy with doing 
and producing, the Leistungsmenscky the athlete, or the man with an 
"iron will" is among the most helpless of men before the more subtle 
power of woman. Civilizations such as those of the Far East, India, 
and Arabia have a more accurate understanding of what is truly 
manly. Their ideal of manhood differs widely from that of the 
European or American ersatz male with regard to physical and 
psychological, spiritual and character traits. 

In general, we may summarize the possible forms of actual rela- 
tionships between the sexes by saying that activity in man and 
passivity in woman concern only the outer plane; on the subtle plane 
it is the woman who is active and the man who is passive (the woman 
is "actively passive" and the man "passively active"): especially when 
union leads to procreation, it is the woman who absorbs and 
possesses. This is the situation in profane eros, and thence arises its 
ambiguity. In situations of this kind, erotic ecstasy only randomly 
and tangentially involves the phenomenon of transcendence, which 
seldom takes effect between ordinary lovers. Only when eros is used 
for sacred purposes are the relationships between activity and 
passivity changed so fundamentally that they reflect the proper 
metaphysical status, whereby the man becomes truly active with 
respect to the woman. This is self-evident because only in the spirit 
and under sacred conditions is it possible to arouse the higher 
pmeiiiial rank of man. The polarity is then inverted and a third level 



168 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



or erotic experience is determined, which is symbolized by the 
Tantric mparita-maitkuna or inverted coitus in ritual expression. The 
stillness of man is the chrism of the higher activity and of the 
presence of the virya, which the magic of woman no longer endangers 
and the sight of "naked Diana" herself no longer threatens. 

As regards the psychology of the sexes which we have sketched in 
the foregoing pages, it is best to recall once again its ontological back- 
ground. We have dealt less with individual qualities or "characteris- 
tics" than with objective components and manifestations of the 
nature of absolute womanhood and absolute manhood in individuals 
according to the fundamental aspects, deducible metaphysically and 
dramatized in myths. These superindividual ''elements" or 
"constants" of sex may be present in individuals in various degrees of 
purity and strength; moreover , they manifest differently depending 
on the race and type of civilization. We may also speak of structures 
and capabilities of the deep consciousness that the more superficial 
and social consciousness — the level where personality is determined 
(cf. chapter 1) — does not always recognize or admit and that the 
"person" never activates fully in the profane sphere. Thus Harding 
wrote quite rightly that it is too dangerous for women to recognize 
what they are in their own depths; they prefer to believe that they are 
what they seem to be, within the facade of the outer consciousness 
that they have constructed for themselves. 12 * 

We must remember that what we confirmed as constituting a true 
difference between the natures of man and woman in no way implies 
a difference of worth. As stated already, the question of sexual super- 
iority or inferiority makes no sense. Every judgment of worth 
between aspects of the male and female psyche must show signs of 
bias toward one sex or the other. Let us note that certain 
psychological aspects of the "absolute woman" might superficially 
appear pejorative, for example, an inclination to lying, "passivity," 
fluidity , a lack of the logical and ethical imperative, and an 
extroverted nature. This apparent lack of worth is only relative and 
appears as such because we are used to the man*s point of view in a 
society ruled by men. But, in Far Eastern terms, "passive 
perfection" is no less perfect than "active perfection" and has its own 
place alongside the latter. What may seem negative has its positive 
side when considered from the point of view of its own principle, in 
the ontological aspect proper to "its own nature." 

Last, we must bear in mind that, aside from their elementary 
sexual development, almost no man is only and in every respect a 
man, and no woman is only and in all respects a woman. We said 
earlier that cases of full sexual development are seldom found. 
Almost every man bears some traces of femininity and every woman 



Gods and Goddesses. Men and Women 



169 



residues of masculinity according to proportions varying over a wide 
range. We must take into account all consequences arising from this 
fact, especially when examining the psychic field, in which that range 
of proportions varies widely indeed. Thus, the traits that we deemed 
typical for the female psyche can be found in man as well as in 
women, particularly in regressive phases of a civilization. Weininger, 
who made evident the reality and importance of "intermediate sexual 
forms/* did not take that sufficiently into account. To give one 
instance, Wcininger thought he could attribute to woman the inner 
propensity for telling lies (in the extreme, a hysterical or neurotic 
propensity) because of her passive internalizing of the values and 
rules of society in contrast to her own sensual nature. Psychoanalysis 
has clearly demonstrated how often this is the case with men too, 
especially contemporary men; psychoanalysis even makes the point 
that what is sometimes thought to constitute the essential nucleus of 
the male psyche, the so-called superego, dominating, criticizing, and 
avenging the instinctive life, is nothing but the artificial product of 
"introjected" social conventions, which causes neuroses and wounds 
of all kinds. We ourselves have spoken of a "race of escapist 
manhood/' 124 with regard to the characteriological, psychological, 
and moral traits that typify men since the last war, and then we can 
see how little the "liquid" characteristic of woman is restricted to 
women alone. 

However, one point must be kept firmly in mind. It is arbitrary to 
judge woman on the basis of man or vice versa, whenever the sexes 
are considered in themselves, but such a judgment is legitimate when 
considering the components or dispositions of the other sex that a 
man or woman may develop within himself or herself In this case, it 
is a question of imperfections as compared with type, of a lack of 
"form," and of the hybrid nature that characterizes an incomplete or 
corrupted being; and, from the point of view of traditional ethics, 
that which in woman is man and in man is woman, is wrong and 
worthless. 

The Ethics of the Sexes 

This final comment leads us to mention the problem of the ethics of 
the sexes, which we can only touch on briefly here for two reasons, 
First 3 according to traditional ideas, ethics do not constitute an inde- 
pendent sphere, as many people today think. If ethics are to have a 
real governing value, they must be based on the realm of the holy and 
i he metaphysical. Second, we have already dealt elsewhere 125 with 
sexual ethics considered according to this outlook. Therefore, we 
shall only skim I his subject here, partly as an introduction to our 
examination ot sexual lot ins that have been made holy. 



170 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



All true ethics, which is to say traditional and not "social" or ab- 
stract and philosophical ones, are founded on the elevation, in a form 
as free as it is absolute, of the actual nature proper to each being. An 
element that is "naturalistic" in origin loses that character and takes 
on an ethical value when it becomes the content of a pure act of will. 
The formula of all ethics is summarized in the dictum "Be yourself 
or "Be true to yourself," wherein the self is to be understood as one's 
own deepest nature or one's own "idea" or the quality of one's own 
type. 

Now ? if we have recognized the elementary characters of manhood 
and of womanhood in a "being by itself* and a "being that depends 
on another being," it seems evident enough what the respective 
ethics of man and woman are; they will be the pure, unconditional as- 
sumption and development of those dispositions by the empirical in- 
dividuals of one or the other sex. As types of pure manhood who 
realize "being by itself," we indicated the warrior and the ascetic, 
whose ideal genuine female counterparts are expressed in the lover 
and the mother. 

Taken in themselves, neither the Demeter nor the Aphrodite 
dispositions have any ethical worth or moral imperative; both 
confirm that woman belongs to mere "nature." Though that is 
generally acknowledged with regard to the Aphrodite disposition, 
there is a marked tendency , entirely without foundation, to glorify 
the maternal disposition. We speak of the "sublime function of 
motherhood," whereas it is hard to show what precisely is sublime 
about motherhood. The female of the human species shares this 
motherly love with the female of various animal species; 126 that love 
is an impersonal instinctive, naturalistic trait of woman devoid of 
any ethical dimension, and it can be displayed in clear contrast to 
ethical values. Such a love does not in any way depend on higher 
principles, I2/ but rather is blind and can be unjust. A mother loves 
her child only because it is her child and not because she sees in it the 
embodiment of what is worthy to be loved. The absolute mother will 
be ready not only to give her own life (thus far there would be a 
naturalistic basis for an ethical attitude) but even to stain herself with 
crimes unforgivable from an ethical point of view to save or defend 
her child. The most thoroughgoing example of this type of mother is 
found in the tale "Imant and His xMother" by Aino Kallas: having 
learned that her son is risking his life in a plot against his master, she 
does not hesitate to betray all the conspirators on condition that the 
master undertakes to spare her son. All his companions are slain and 
her son is saved, but, of course, as soon as he learns the truth, he can- 
not help killing himself. The contrast between male ethics and 
maternal love is shown here in its crudest form. 



Gods and Goddesses, Men and Women 



171 



A woman would have to sublimate her individuality and possess a 
heroic and sacrificial disposition for her natural tendencies as a 
mother and lover to take on an ethical character. When such is the 
case, it is a question no longer of blind love, instinct, or compulsion 
that leaves no opportunity for choice, but of a free act and a far-seeing 
love in which would remain woman's natural dependency on another 
(here, the son) but which is also united with an ability to distinguish 
and with a positive will capable of transcending her naturalistic 
substratum, so tar perhaps as to even desire the death of an unworihy 
son. Some Spartan, ancient Roman, Iberian, and Germanic types of 
mother can provide example of this first ethical potentiality of 
woman. 

The second ethical potentiality of woman corresponds to the type 
of the lover and is realized in the "being dependent on another" and 
in living for another 128 in a heroic and transfiguring environment in 
which man is desired as her own "master and husband" but is also 
venerated almost like a god; this capability overcomes ail exclusive- 
ness and ah selfishness and turns her self-offering into an almost 
sacrificial act. She conserves the disintegrating, life-giving, and 
"demonic" potential of the absolute Aphroditic woman but frees it of 
its destructive and "sucking" side, as we mentioned earlier. In our 
book cited earlier, we dealt with institutions of the traditional world 
thai presupposed this possible ethical change in woman as a person 
not of a Demeter nature but of an Aphroditic and Dionysiac one. The 
perfection of this way is woman who wants to follow her own 
husband beyond the limits of her own nature, even into the flames of 
a funeral pyre (a custom mistakenly assigned only to India, for a 
similar custom, inspired by the same spirit, existed among the 
Thracians, Wends, ancient Germans, Chinese, and Incas), 12 ' 

We shall restrict ourselves in this book to this very sketchy outline 
of the ethics of the sexes. We will leave aside altogether the "prob- 
lems" of woman and of sexual relations, as people think of them now- 
adays in relation to marriage, divorce, emancipation, free love, and 
so forth . These are all spurious problems. The only true problem is to 
what extent in a given society and epoch man can be himself and 
woman can be herself in an accurate approximation of their 
respective archetypes, and also to what extent the relationships of 
man and woman reflect the natural and unchangeable law rooted in 
die very metaphysics of male and female. This law is "reciprocal 
integration and completion together with a subordination of the 
female principle to the male." Everything else, as Nietzsche would 
s;iy, is nonsense; and in the introduction we observed in what a state 
I he modern Wesiern world finds itself in relation to man, woman, 
and ms iliaiiks Icioiii sn called "progress. " 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



This chapter involves the problem of what point of view to adopt vis- 
a-vis the subject we shall treat. Its essence belongs to experiences 
proper to human beings different from the people of today with 
respect to their civilization and the world they inhabited; for their 
world had another dimension. They understood the supersensual as 
a fundamental part of reality and moreover felt it as a "presence. " We 
cannot follow the method used in modern ^neutral" researches 
restricted to the gathering and ordering of the facts of ancient and 
foreign traditions in their obscure external appearance. Instead, we 
shall go forward with an interpretation that considers, first, the inner 
dimension of such facts, bearing in mind that such an interpretation, 
in practice, implies an unavoidable margin of speculation. The ritual 
and evocatory side of eros in sacred ceremonies and in the 
nonnaturalistic use of sex has always played a fundamental role. But, 
especially in dealing with institutional forms that have now 
disappeared, it is almost impossible to ascertain to what degree the 
examples we shall discuss preserve a genuine depth dimension, 
retaining the ritual element involving actual evocations, or whether 
instead they have become reduced to mere formal custom. Second, 
our investigation is hampered because our knowledge is often based 
on fragmentary evidence and forms that were already quite removed 
in time from their original sources. However, we shall seek, as best 
we can, to set in order the essential materials available to us. 

To guide ourselves, we shall first distinguish the nonprofane forms 
that sexuality has assumed. 

1 . The transformation of sexual union into a holy institution 

2. Evocatory and sacramental Forms given to cults of sexual union 

i. Ascetic detachment of the sexual drive from the plane of the Dyad and 
its inner transmutation for the purpose of spiritual realization 

4. The special practice of sexual union for the purpose of ecstatic or 
initiatory breakthrough in existential level 

5. Each of these possibilities may lead, in addition, to active (magical) 
applications beyond the pure fact of inner experience. We may distin- 
guish (a) primitive sexual magic (fertility rites and holy orgies), (b) in- 
dividual active sexual magic in a strictly ceremonial sense, and (c) 
initiatory sexual magic. 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



173 



Wedlock as "Mystery" in the World of Tradition 

It has been generally acknowledged , especially since the 
fundamental work of Fustel de Coulanges, that the family in ancient 
times was an institution with a religious basis as well as a natural 
association. But, more generally, the family has a religious 
foundation in every pro to-original civilization and all great 
traditional cultures. It was impossible for this holy character not to 
affect the intimate relations and the conjugal use of sexuality. 

It should first be observed that the individualistic factor in mar- 
riages was quite unimportant and certainly not the determining one. 
Inclination and affection were only accessory elements, and the stock 
carried the most weight. The digmtas matrimonii in Rome was linked 
from the very beginning to the idea of ancestral descent. Thus, not 
only in Rome but also in Greece and other traditional civilizations, 
the woman selected for the digmtas matrimonii was chosen with this 
end in view. The man was perhaps allowed the privilege of having 
other women at the same time for the purpose of mere erotic 
experience (thus arose the institution of concubinage, which was 
recognized by law alongside the family system as its complement). 
Moreover, the wife herself often distinguished between her merely 
erotic role and her role as childbearer. When a man lay with his wife 
with this purpose in mind, a ritual was often carried out with 
lustration or propitiation ceremonies and special methods were used 
in the practice of coitus. Often a period of abstinence would precede 
the act (in ancient China the man withheld his seed during this 
period); one ritual even considered exorcising the devil of lust, who 
was thought to hold the woman in his power; in some cases, prayers 
and invocations were made to the gods, a favorable date was chosen, 
and finally the persons were isolated. Elements of a special science 
are recorded which define the circumstances suitable for influencing 
the child's sex at conception. 

Next it is important to emphasize that, beginning with the totemic 
societies, the concept of procreation transcended the naturalistic idea 
of the biological survival of the species; the purpose of generation was 
deemed essential to preserve and hand down over the ages the mys- 
tical force of one's own blood and clan and, above all, the force of the 
primordial forefather, inborn as the genius or creative spirit of the 
stock and symbolized in classical antiquity by the everlasting holy 
lire of the household. Participation in the rites of a family created 
new kinsmen or admitted an outsider to the family, and certain 
extant indications lead us to believe that the woman in traditional 
aiuiquitVi before belonging to the husband, was wedded by this 
tnysik-nl lone of ilie slock. Il is meaningful that in Rome the 
"lluikiiiiiis" or niani:ij',c bed war; called the firms ^cnudis or "bed ol 



174 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



the genius" More precise evidence concerns the Roman wedding 
custom according to which a woman had to unite herself to the god 
Matitus, the priapic Tutinus, who was fundamentally the same as the 
genius domesticus or larfa?niliaris (god of the household) , before lying 
with her husband. Upon entering her husband's house, the new 
bride had to sit on the ithyphallic image of the god before going to her 
marriage bed, just as if the god were to deflower her first ("so that the 
god seems to have been the first to savor their modesty"). 1 Similar 
rites could be found in other civilizations- The real purpose of 
marriage was to produce the "son of duty," as the first-born male was 
called in India; with a prayer that he should be a "hero," the final 
wording of the wedding ceremony , shradda, was as follows; viram me 
dattapitarah (O fathers, make my son a hero). 2 

In the sacred ceremonies of the family, the polarity of the sexes was 
played out, emphasizing their complementarity. Hence developed 
the part often played by woman in Indo-European household cults in 
connection with the fire, of which she was the natural guardian since, 
in principle, she had the nature of Vesta, the "living flame" or fire of 
life. In a certain way woman was the living upholder of this supersen- 
sual influence and thus acted as a counterpart of the pure male princi- 
ple, of the paterfamilias. Thus it was the woman's duty above all to 
see that the flame stayed pure and did not go out; she invoked its holy 
force when offering sacrifices in the tire* 3 

The same complementary system was in force in Rome for the 
priesthood. There, if the wife of the flamen or priest (the flaminica 
dialis, or wife of the priest of Jupiter) died, he had to relinquish his 
office just as though his power had been lessened or paralyzed 
through the lack of a life-giving complement. Similar evidence has 
been gathered from other traditions, such as that of the brahmins, 
where, however, further meanings have been emphasized. The 
woman, joined to the man by the sacrament, samskara, was presented 
as the goddess of the house, grihadevata^ and originally was 
associated with her husband in the cult and rites. The woman acted 
as the heart, kunda y and also as the flame of the sacrifice. People are 
advised to meditate on the woman, who is thought of as a fire, 
yoshamagnin dhyayha. Within this framework, the union between 
man and woman was conceived as a great rite or vajna and as an 
equivalent of the sacrifice in the fire, homa. It was said, "He who 
knows woman in terms of fire attains to freedom"; and the 
Shmhapata-brakmana makes the woman say, "If you make use of me 
in the sacrifice, you will obtain through me any blessing you may call 
for." 4 The fruits of one form of the sacrifice of the soma (vajapeyu) 
were said to be equal to those produced by union with a woman when 
that union was accomplished with a knowledge of (he 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



175 



correspondences and cosmic equivalents in her and her body. The 
womb, as the center of woman, was indicated as the sacrificial fire. 
In another traditional text, all the phases of coitus were made to 
correspond to an act of public worship, suggesting the possibility 
that the latter was carried out in conjunction with the former. 6 

Wedlock would generally show the characteristics of a "mystery" 
in a system practicing rituals. In Greece, the goddess of wedlock was 
called Aphrodite Teleia, the Fulfiller, her attribute coming from 
telos, a word used also for initiation. In a well-known Indo-European 
ritual linked to the act of procreation, the conscious identification 
with the cosmic male and female, the Sky and the Earth, was 
confirmed openly; 

Then the husband should draw near to her and pronounce the formula "I 
am He and you are She; you arc She and I am He. I am the song [Soman] 
and you are the refrain [re]; . , . I am the Sky and you are the Earth. 
Come, embrace me, let us mingle our seed for the birth of a male and for 
the richness of our home," Next, making [the woman] open her legs, he 
should say, u O ye Sky and Earth, mingle yourselvesl" Then he should 
enter her and with his mouth joined to hers stroke her three times from 
above downward and say, "... Just as the Earth welcomes the Fire to 
its bosom, as the Sky shuts Indra within its womb, and as the cardinal 
points teem with wind, so I leave in you the seed of {the name of the 
child]." 7 

Aianhood, therefore, was under the sign of the Sky and womanhood 
under that of the Earth . In Greece as well, according to Pindar, when 
referring to the foundation of their deepest nature, men in love called 
on Helios, the Sun, whereas women invoked Selene, the Moon. 5 We 
should also note that in almost all the Hindu dialects having their 
origin in Sanskrit, women were called prakriti^ a word that, as we saw 
earlier, was the metaphysical designation of "nature" and also of the 
female force of the impassive god, the pwmha. 9 The background of 
marriage as a holy ceremony was destined to become slowly obs- 
cured, although to this day positive traces of it still persist which can 
only be explained by supposing its prior existence. It was only pre- 
served with precise divine and cosmic relationships in the cultural 
domain, in a specific sense, in connection with varieties of the hieros 
gamos, the ritual holy marriage or marriage to a god, as we shall 
recount shortly. In ancient times, it was rightly said that a people 
who made wedding customs into a rite that conformed to the eternal 
laws formed a great magical chain binding the material realm to 
higher realms. 10 Novalis was right when deeming that marriage as it 
is known nowadays is like a "desecrated mystery"; with the passage 
of lime il lias been reduced in effect lo nothing more than the only 
iiltcniaiive provide* I bvsncielv against frai of loneliness. And I he fad 



176 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



that Claude de Saint-Martin certainly did not understand the 
importance of his words and had no vision of the situation in which 
those words are true, does not lessen their accuracy: "If mankind 
knew what marriage is, it would have at one and the same time an 
extraordinary desire for it and a tremendous fear of it; for by means of 
it man could once again be made like God or could end in total 



ruin. 



»n 



In the framework of the creationist religions, however, the generic 
concept of the sanctity of the procrcative act has persisted. It is consi- 
dered and experienced as a reflection, an extension or reenactment of 
the divine creative act. In the Mazdaism of Iran we can note an 
ancient wedding rite in which the idea of divine grace is linked even 
to the maximum intensity of coitus. 12 An Islamic ritual that partly 
recalls the Indo-European rite we just mentioned demonstrates how 
foreign to such traditions is the idea of sexuality as something 
obscene and sinful. According to this ritual the husband says when 
he is entering the woman: "In the name of Allah the merciful and 
kind, Bismillah al-rahman al~rahi?n. Then both the woman and man 
say together, 'In the name of God,' and lastly, when he feels the 
woman climaxing and is about to bathe her with his seed, the man 
alone says the remaining words of the formula, "... merciful and 
kind/ ,fl The great Sufi teacher Ibn Arabi went so far as to talk of 
contemplating God in woman, in ritualized coitus conforming to 
metaphysical and theological values. In his treatise Fusus al-hikam he 
wrote, "This [conjugal] act corresponds to the projection of the 
divine will on that which He created in His own image, at the very 
moment when He created it, to recognize Himself in His own 
form. . . . The Prophet loved women precisely because of their 
ontological station and because they are like a passive receptacle of 
his own act and lie in the same relationship to him as Universal 
Nature [tab? ah] stands to God. It is in Universal Nature that God 
makes the forms of the world reveal themselves by means of His will 
and by means of the divine act, which is manifested as a sexual act in 
the category of forms constituted of the elements, as spiritual will 
[himmah — it is that which we have called transcendental manhood 
elsewhere] in the world of the spirits of light, and as logical 
conclusion in the category of reason." (It would be possible here to 
refer to logical strictness as the main expression of the male principle, 
Cf, chapter 4,) Ibn Arabi said that he who loves women in this way 
and evokes such signiiica lions in union with them "loves them with a 
divine love." For him who, instead, only obeys sexual attraction, 
"the sexual act will be a form lacking any spirit; of course, the spirit 
always remains immanent in the form as such, bin il will be 
imperceptible to him who lies with his wife or wiih any woman just 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



177 



for sensual pleasure, without recognizing the true object of his own 
desire, , . . 'People know that I am in love but they don't know with 
whom!* This verse can be applied to him who loves only for sensual 
pleasure or to him who loves the giver of that pleasure, namely 
woman, without any awareness of the spiritual meaning involved. 
Were he aware, he would also know by virtue of what and whom he 
enjoys this pleasure, and he would then be spiritually perfect." 14 In 
this Sufi theology of love we should see only a broader, more elevated 
and precise awareness of the ritual mode in which men of this culture 
have more or less clearly understood and conceived of conjugal 
relationships, beginning with the blessing conferred by the Law of 
the Koran on the sexual act in a polygamous system. Hence arises the 
special meaning of procreation, understood as the extension of the 
divine creative power in man. 

Judaism did nor lake an ascetic or puritanical stand on sex. Wed- 
lock was thought of not as a concession to the law of the flesh, but as 
one of the holiest mysteries. For the Kabbala, every true wedding 
was in fact a symbolic re-creation of the union of God with the 
Shekhinah. 15 

Last, the Chinese doctrine of royal unions is worth mentioning. 
The king had 120 women besides his wife, and his method of consor- 
ting with them had a ritual and symbolic meaning. The royal women 
were divided into four groups in an inverse relationship between 
their number and value. The largest group consisted of women 
deemed less noble. These were only allowed to go to the king on 
given nights before the full moon and were sent for during nights that 
were almost dark and without moonlight. The last group of only 
three women had for themselves the two nights before the sacred 
night of the full moon. On that night, when the full moon in all its 
splendor faces the sun macrocosmically, the queen alone faces the 
king, the Unique Man, and is united with him. This is the idea of a 
union that is absolute at the midpoint and then becomes more and 
more attenuated as multiplicity dominates and the rank is lower, 
precisely like the force of the One in fertilizing matter; these 
conditioned reflections which take place in the holy marriage of the 
royal couple are based on a system of participations that follows a 
cosmic model. L6 

( Christianity and Sexuality 

The sacred institution of marriage in Catholicism has a hybrid char- 
acter because of the ethics chosen by that religion. We can see in 
( laiholicisin the outcome of the unruly interplay between principles 
;ind rules of (wo wry distinct planes. Traditional religions based on a 
eicaiiutiisi belie! hive always recognized iwn laws. One of them 



178 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



179 



concerns the fallen original "being." In fact, when reproducing the 
biblical passage that speaks of the two becoming one flesh and 
leaving father and mother, Paul added, "This is a great mystery" 
(Eph. 5: 31-32). The precise word used here is "mystery" and not 
"sacrament" as written in the Vulgate. In Paul's epistles there is a 
reference to the double status, male and female, and implicitly to the 
corresponding ways for man and woman in the words "Forasmuch as 
[man] is the image and glory of God; but woman is the glory of man" 
(1 Cor. 11:7), and also the mystery of die conversion or "redemption" 
of the female through the male principle (Shakti led back by Shiva), 
with the commandment that a man should love his wife as Christ 
loved the church, giving himself for it "that he might sanctify and 
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word"; this is followed by 
the words "So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He 
that loveth his wife loveth himself (Eph. 5: 25-28). But Paul's 
epistles, in contradiction, also deny all higher capabilities of sexual 
experience that is taken as "fornication" and shamelessness, while 
marriage is deemed to be a mere makeshift. We also read, "It is good 
for a man not to touch a woman. Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, 
let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own 
husband"; and further on, "But if they cannot contain themselves, 
let them marry; for it is better to marry than to burn" (1 Cor. 7: 1-2, 

It was precisely this latter view which was taken as the basis of 
postevangelical Christianity, for which sexual life in general is a 
sin. 17 It is not lawful for Roman Catholics to have sex except in 
wedlock and only for the purpose of procreation. We know, 
however, that marriage as a regular "sacrament" and not as a generic 
blessing of the spouses only appeared at a late stage in Christianity 
(about the twelfth century) and that even more recently, the Council 
of Trent in 1 563 imposed the religious rite for every wedding that was 
not to be viewed on the same level as concubinage. This sacramental, 
posthumous aspect has a purpose that is fundamentally secular 
rather than spiritual. As the idea of the sinfulness and simple 
"natural character" of sex remains and since sex is not 
acknowledged except as a means for procreation, marriage here is 
shown to be exactly what Paul has disparagingly conceded it to be, 
just a lesser evil, a "cure for the sickness of lust" for men and women 
who are incapable of choosing celibacy and succumb to the flesh; it 
was Saint Thomas who said that "the act of marriage is always a sin." 
The canonical idea that marriage as a sacrament "confers the grace 
needed to bless the lawful union of man with woman by perfecting 
natural love and giving it a character of indissolubility which was 
lacking beforehand*' is therefore reduced lo the mere form of j 



superstructure. It is in no way a rite intended to establish or promote 
the deeper, transfiguring, sacred dimensions of sexual experience, 
because, as a principle, theology has condemned anyone who, even 
in wedlock, broadens this experience without having procreation as 
his essential goal and detaches himself from a practice of "chaste 
unions." This involves the mistaken belief that erosand the "instinct 
for reproduction" should be one and the same thing. Moreover, we 
should bear in mind the disappearance^ in a society controlled by this 
dogma, of everything that in the ancient family could impart to 
procreation the higher meaning referred to earlier, which is linked to 
familial and ancestral cults. In practice, the Christian point of view 
prevents sex from becoming a sacred ceremony, which leads to its 
repression and noneonsecration because of the hybrid nature of this 
point of view. For it has laid down as a general rule, still valid in our 
limes, that detachment from sex should be viewed in the light of 
ascetic transformation and not as a puritanical repression of the 
sexual drive. Thus, the Christian religious rule has only bequeathed 
us social restraint and the simple mediocre and dull fettering of the 
human animal, which is devoid of any interest to us. Only with the 
marginal updating of Vatican Council II has the point of view of the 
church been modified somewhat and a certain emphasis given to 
sexual union in wedlock, although the same relationship to 
procreation has been kept. 

The rule of celibacy of the priesthood in Roman Catholicism arises 
from a similar confusion. The type of the priest (secular clergy) has 
been confused with that of the ascetic (monk). Most traditional civili- 
zations with long priestly dynasties separated these distinct roles. 
The continuity of blood acted as a natural upholder and carrier of the 
continuity of supernatural influence transmitted down through suc- 
cessive generations of a given stock. Moreover, a law intended for 
persons who live in the world and not for the ascetic must have been 
very like that expressed by Ibn Ata: "Men of devotion and austerity 
execrate because they are far from God; if they saw Him in every- 
thing, they would not execrate anything." 18 

A different attitude toward sex has only been adopted by certain 
decidedly heterodox and outlawed Christian doctrines or in a few 
random cases. In the first of these two categories we should call to 
mind the doctrines of the Americans, Bcghards and "Brothers of the 
Free Spirit" (twelfth to fourteenth century), who drew from the idea 
of divine omnipresence conclusions about sex similar to those of the 
traditions referred to earlier. In such doctrines two religions were 
distinguished, one for the ignorant, the other for the enlightened 
who could reach such n stale thai they could see God acting in them- 
selves and in cvei vihiiij*. for hint who attains such a slate, sin tlisap- 



. 



180 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



pears and the ascetic rule loses all meaning, for even the actions of the 
body glorify God and, whatever they may be, are felt to be carried out 
by God in human form. It was stated that the enlightened man who 
was free in spirit could not sin; it was even said that women were 
created to be used by those who live in such a state of freedom; 
moreover , even freedom from law was claimed, which went far 
beyond anything needed to surmount the Christian concept of the 
essential sinfulness and impurity of sex, for such a freedom would 
lead to complete license. The following proposition is attributed to 
some followers of this belief: "He who is thus free cannot 
sin . . . and if his nature should be disposed to an act of love, he may 
lawfully do it with his sister or mother and at any place, such as 
altars." 19 But in such circumstances, we must distinguish what the 
enlightened actually professed in secret from what their orthodox 
foes slanderously attributed to them. From our research, we believe 
that this was mainly a matter of doctrine, or principles that were not 
necessarily put into practice. 

As an example of random individual experience, let us use the one 
cited by Woodroffe concerning the outcome of an inquiry carried out 
in the eighteenth century in the Convent of the Dominicans of Saint 
Catherine at Prato because of the scandal caused by the mystical sen- 
sualism practiced there in secret. A declaration of the young abbess 
of this convent is meaningful: "As our spirit is free, it is only the in- 
tention that can make an action wicked. It is enough, therefore, to lift 
ourselves in our minds up to God, and then nothing is sinful.' 5 She 
added that to be united to God was to be united as man and woman; 
the everlasting life of the soul and paradise in this world consisted in 
the "transubstantiation of the union that man makes with woman." 
The "enjoyment of God" was reached by the act that united one with 
God, and this was effected "by the cooperation of man and woman, of 
the man in whom I recognize God." She concluded: "To practice that 
which we mistakenly call impurity is true purity, which God wishes 
and bids us to practice and without w r hich we have no way of finding 
God, who is truth." 20 But we have now said enough on this subject, 
because in cases of this kind we are no longer dealing with sacred 
ceremonies in a formal and institutional framework, but with 
marginal experiences having a free and mystical background. We 
shall encounter them in other traditions as well. However, in this 
unusual case, we are struck by its likeness to the ideas that elsewhere 
have marked the ritual nature of marital practices free from the onus 
of sin. 

We have already mentioned the collective rites of the Slavic 
Khlysti, which involved the sexual union of men and women, men 
being considered the embodiment of Christ, women i he embodiment 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



181 



of the Virgin Alary; but it is obvious that the Christian element in 
these rites is a mere whitewash superimposed on survivals and 
revivals of previous heathen rites. 

Sacred Prostitution and Holy Marriages 

Traditional cults aim essentially at manifesting the real presence of a 
particular supersensual being in a specific setting and at the reception 
by an individual or group of that being's spiritual influence. This 
transmission has occurred through rites, sacrifices, and sacraments. 
Sex, too, has been used to this end in various civilizations. 

One of the most typical cases occurs in the framework of the mys- 
teries of the Great Goddess, within which erotic practices were in- 
tended to evoke the divine female principle and revive her presence 
at a specific place within the community. This was one of the true 
purposes of the rites of sacred prostitution in the temples of the many 
Aphrodirk goddesses in the Mediterranean cycle, such as Ishlar. 
Mylitta, Anaitis, Aphrodite, Innini, and Athagatia, We must distin- 
guish two different sides of this practice. On the one hand, there was 
the custom that every girl on reaching puberty had to give up her vir- 
ginity in a sacred ritual context rather than a profane one before she 
could be wedded; she had to give herself in the sacred enclosure of 
the temple to any stranger who made a symbolic offering and in- 
voked, through her, the Great Goddess. 21 On the other hand, there 
were temples with an established body of temple slaves for the service 
of the goddess. These priestesses practiced a form of worship that the 
modern world would call "prostitution." The mystery of carnal love 
was celebrated not in a formal and symbolic rite but in a magical, 
operative rite, to nourish the current of psychism which manifested 
itself in the presence of the goddess and, at the same time, to pass on 
to the men who copulated with the priestesses the goddess's 
influence or virtue as in a sacrament. These young women, called 
"virgins" (parthenoi hierai), pure ones, or blessed ones (qadisktu, 
mugig, zerma$itu)j were deemed to embody the goddess and to be the 
"bearers" of the goddess, from whom, in their specifically erotic 
duty, they took their name, Ishtaritu. 22 The sexual act thus 
performed had both the general function proper to sacrifices 
intended to evoke or revive divine presences and a function 
structurally identical with participation in the Eucharist. Ritual sex 
was the instrument for man's participation in the sacrum, in this case 
borne and administered by the woman; it was a technique to make an 
experiential contact with the divinity and to receive her. The trauma 
of the coitus, together with the interruption of individual awareness 
ihat ii caused, formed an especially favorable condition for that 
contact. 



182 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



183 



Such a use of woman was not limited to the mysteries of the Great 
Goddess of the ancient Mediterranean world; it was also witnessed in 
the Orient. The ritual offering of virgins is encountered in the Indian 
temples of the Juggernaut and had the purpose of "feeding" the div- 
inity or effectively arousing his presence. In many cases the temple 
dancers had the same priestly duties as the temple slaves of Ishtar and 
Mylitta; and their dances, punctuated with mudra, symbolic 
evocatory gestures, generally had a sacred character; and their 
"prostitution" also was holy. Even well-known families, therefore, 
deemed it an honor that their daughters should be consecrated to this 
duty in the temples from their earliest years. Having the name of 
d&vadasi, they were sometimes considered the wives of the god* In 
this case they were not the bearers of the female sacrum who initiated 
men into the mysteries of the Goddess, but served generically as fire 
in sexual union. Traditional Hindu texts had held it equivalent to 
sacrifice in the fire, as we have already seen. 

Moreover, there is reason to think that even outside of these cultic 
and institutional frameworks courtesanship of ancient times and in 
the Orient had aspects that were not merely profane, for the women 
were taught to bring to the aet of love dimensions and results that 
have been lost today. Knowledge of what we may call hyperbiological 
and subtle physiology has been found in courtesans of the Far East, 
who were often formed into guilds, having their own heraldic arms, 
symbolic insignia, and ancient traditions. There is reason to believe 
that in some cases the profane ars amatona are decadent forms of the 
external elements of a specific science based on traditional priestly 
wisdom j we cannot overlook the possibility that among the postures 
shown in works such as the forty-eight figurae Veneris of Forberg 
there may be some that originally had the meaning of mudra or magi- 
cal and ritual postures used for the sexual act, since these meanings 
have endured even in the practice of sexual magic among modern 
circles, as we shall see later on. 

We dealt earlier with love potions, whose meaning has also been 
completely lost, for we know only degraded uses of them or their 
equivalents in popular supersitition, mystifications used by 
worthless sorceresses. The authentic ones were intended to provide 
sexual experience with dimensions transcending those of ordinary 
eros rather than to awaken common passion. Demosthenes caused a 
lover of Sophocles who had the reputation of being a compounder of 
love potions to be condemned, but during the lawsuit it became 
known that she had been initiated and had attended circles close to 
the mysteries. In general, many courtesans or women of their type, 
even in sagas and legends, were described as enchantresses not only 
because of their womanly fascination but also because of I heir 



specific knowledge of magic. The Kamamtra (I, I) list of the skills in 
which a ganika or high-class courtesan was obliged to be expert is 
long and rather vulgar, but nonetheless it significantly included the 
magical arts, the art of drawing mystical evocatory diagrams 
(mandate), and that of preparing enchantments. 23 When the 
renowned Phryne showed herself naked at her trial, Atheneus 
relates, her defenders emphasized not so much the aesthetic aspect of 
her profane beauty but rather her sacred and Aphroditic aspect; 
"The judges were seized with holy fear of the divinity; they dared not 
condemn the prophetess and priestess of Aphrodite." She also 
appeared naked to the initiates of Heusis and thereafter at the 
Poseidon festival of "Waters'*; the deep, magical, and vertiginous 
side of woman's nakedness was undoubtedly emphasized here. We 
believe that originally the courtesans duties covered the 
administration of the women's mysteries activating her aspect as an 
embodiment, individualization, and living symbol of the essence of 
womanhood. 

In these ancient ritual complexes we must consider the possibility 
of a transcendental sexual development or of the momentary or 
quasi-permanent embodiment, in the priestess-prostitutes, of the 
divinities or archetypes of their sex. This would be actuated in 
precisely the manner by which Catholicism, through consecration of 
the Communion wafer, actuates the divine presence therein. In many 
Aegean monuments the representations of the priestesses are often 
confused with that of the Great Goddess, 24 which leads us to believe 
that the former were actually worshipped by a sort of divine proxy. 
Living images of Ishtar, Isis, and other goddesses of the same type 
can be seen in historical Mediterranean and Oriental queens. Those 
momentary embodiments of a divine being in a given individual, 
determined by a magical and ritual atmosphere, are a mysterium 
transformationis similar to the mystery of the Catholic Mass itself. 

A similar mystery imbues the hieros gamos or holy marriage, the 
marriages of gods. These ritual or religious unions of man and 
woman were intended to celebrate and renew the Mystery of the 
Ternary or union of the everlasting male to the everlasting female 
(Sky with Earth), whence should arise the central current of creation. 
The corresponding principles were embodied and activated, and 
I heir momentary physical union became an effective and evocatory 
reproduction of divine union beyond the realms of time and space. 
The purpose of such rites, therefore, was different from those 
mentioned above as rites of participation in the substance or 
influence of one or another goddess. Here it was the Three, the 
Ternary beyond (he stale of Two, which was called forth by the 
impiial siti sons to awaken at 01 responding iiiMiiciuv periodically in a 



L 



184 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



given community; this awakening was carried out against a 
background of ritualism and not of individual initiatory experiences. 

Rites of this kind can be gleaned from the traditions and religious 
beliefs of highly diverse civilizations. As one salient example, we 
shall cite the ancient mystery wherein once a year the high priestess 
personifying the goddess copulated with the man representing the 
male principle in the holy place. When the rite had been 
consummated, the other priestesses took the new sacred fire, which 
was deemed to have been born from that union, and with its flame lit 
the hearth fires of every household in the community. It has been 
rightly observed that this rite resembles the one celebrated even now 
at Jerusalem on Easter Saturday. Moreover, the Easter rite of 
consecration of the water, celebrated in particular by the Orthodox 
church, preserves visible traces of sexual symbolism: the candle, 
which has an obviously phallic meaning , is dipped three times in the 
font, symbol of the female principle of the Waters; the priest touches 
the water and blows on it three times, making the sign of the Greek 
letter pi; the consecration words pronounced at this juncture include 
the phrase "May the power of the Holy Ghost descend throughout 
the whole depth of this font . . . and fertilize all the substance of this 
water for regeneration." In the East the very widespread 
iconography of the lingam or phallus put within the lotus (padmd) or 
the overturned triangle (the sign of the female yam and symbol of the 
Goddess or Shakti) has the same meaning; and, as we shall see later 
on, this symbolism may also allude to actual sexual practices. 

In fact, the original rite of" the holy marriage has often been pre- 
served in forms where a symbolic rite or simulation takes the place of 
the real sacred sexual union of a man with a woman. While dealing 
with actual usages, we may mention the so-called seasonal sexual fer- 
tility rites. These are one of the warhorses that contemporary 
ethnology first associated with the "solar myth," passed on next to 
totemism, and now explains as "agrarian." 

In reality those rites are an example of applied and operant magic 
belonging to the context noted earlier. We mentioned the experimen- 
tal contact with the primordial that orgies may have enhanced in the 
spirit of the participants. Owing to its very nature and the change in 
existential level that it implies, this state may allow an effective ex- 
tranormal insertion of man's force into the cosmic web, into the order 
of natural phenomena, and, in general, into every cycle of fecundity, 
as an application of a higher strengthening and galvanizing power 
along the same basic direction of the natural process. Therefore, 
what Eliade wrote in this respect is correct: "The orgy corresponds 
generally to the holy marriage. The limitless genesiac frenzy on earth 
must correspond to the union of the divine pair. The excesses play a 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



185 



very precise part in the arrangement of the sacred; they sunder the 
barriers existing between man and society, nature and the gods; they 
help in circulating the force, life, and seeds from one level to another 
and from one zone of reality into all the others." 25 This is, in fact, one 
possible meaning of some of the vast collection of "agrarian" rites 
gathered by Frazer. But, when one is dealing with historical 
traditions in which the collective orgiastic facts are replaced by 
isolated and well-circumscribed forms of the sacred marriage, one 
should not generalize but distinguish the meaning of the magical 
(and, in a way, "naturalistic") rite from a higher meaning belonging 
to the mysteries and linked essentially to the task of inner 
regeneration, even though in certain cases, the more evolved rite may 
have embodied both meanings. This seems to have been the case in 
the Eleusinian mysteries where the rite of plowing was linked to the 
holy marriage as an initiatory rite. To overlook this twofold meaning 
is typical of research that unconsciously chooses the tendency of 
modern profane sciences by referring the higher to the lower or 
emphasizing only the lower wherever possible. 

Depending on the case in question, it may be either the man or the 
woman who is the source of holiness in the sexual rituals. We may 
find, therefore, holy marriages in which only one of the two persons 
is transformed and takes on a divine and suprahuman character. In 
these cases the union may be intended not as a mystical participation 
but for procreation. The recurring theme in many legends of a 
woman possessed by a "god" or of a man who possesses a goddess are 
too well known to be recalled here. We need only mention a few cases 
in which such connections arc presented against regular institutional 
backgrounds. Thus in ancient Egypt the pharaoh was united with his 
wife not as a man but as the embodiment of Horus so as to continue 
the line of his "divine royalty." In the Hellenic festival of the 
Anthesteria or Feast of Flowers, the sacrifice made by the wife of the 
king-archon to Dionysus in his temple of Leneum and her copulation 
with the god were the high points of the ritual. In the rite of holy 
union celebrated at Babylon, a chosen young woman ascended by 
night the seven floors of the terraced tower of the holy ziggurat to a 
nuptial room above and awaited coitus with the god. It was also 
believed that the priestess of Apollo at Patara passed the night on the 
"holy bed" in union with the god. 

The symbolization of the god as an animal led both to an uncouth 
literal interpretation and to stories of copulation between human 
beings and holy animals. Thus Herodotus tells of the sacred ram of 
Mendcs, called "ilie lord of young women," to whom the women in 
I'ljjypl gave llicniselves in order lo have a "divine offspring"; echoes 
of (hesr same I hemes persist even in Roman iradilious. Ovid speaks 



186 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



of the divine voice which bade the Sabine wives to let themselves be 
fertilized by the sacred he-goat. 

This doctrinal foundation underlies the idea that human and indi- 
vidual limits can be overcome and that a "real presence" can, under 
certain conditions, be embodied or aroused in a man or woman 
through transubstantiation. This concept seemed natural to people 
in ancient times owing to their innate idea of the world; but modern 
man takes it as an illusion and accepts it only as a psychological 
phenomenon devoid of reality, an eruption of archetypes from the 
unconscious. It will be even harder, therefore, for him to understand 
the reality present in traditions dealing with integration through the 
female principle, in which an actual woman takes no part, not even as 
a symbol for ritual evocation; instead, these traditions involve an 
"invisible woman," an influence that does not belong to the world of 
phenomena. Wc shall now speak of this more direct and 
nonindividual manifestation of the power imaged in the mythology 
of sex. 

Incubus and Succubus; Fetishism and Evocalory Processes 

We are now presented with all the rich, strange material of the sagas 
and heroic myths in which a supernatural woman is shown as the 
giver of life., wisdom, salvation, mystical nourishment, holy force, 
and everlasting life itself. As such, she is often linked symbolically to 
the tree; in Egyptian representations, for instance, the goddess who 
has the "Key of Life" or "Draught of Life," Nut, Mail, or Hathor, is 
often confused with the sacred tree, shown as the tree of temptation 
in Hebrew myths, as the tree of enlightenment in Buddhism, or of 
victory and empire in the legend of the priest Gianni. 26 We 
mentioned these sagas elsewhere 27 and indicated the meaning of the 
heroic myths. We shall highlight two specific examples here. 

According to the Hindu doctrine of royalty, the chrism of power is 
given to a sovereign by his wedding to the goddess Lakshmi (con- 
ceived of as his wife among all his human spouses), who takes on the 
supernatural animating force of "royal good fortune" (rajatakskmi). 
The king would lose his throne were she to leave him. We also see in 
the Mediterranean cycle representations of goddesses who hand 
kings the "key of life" (an ideogram having the sound atikh, "to live" 
or "living") while speaking words such as those addressed by King 
Ashurbanipal to the goddess, "From you I invoke the gift of life," 
and those of the Zohar (III, 51a, 50b), "The path which leads to the 
great and mighty Tree of Life is the Mistress (equivalent to the 
Shekhinah as wife of the king). 

We may even hear a last echo of this in Christianity, for in I he Vir- 
gin, conceived of as the almighty mediatrix of grace, appears die 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



187 



theme of a female principle from which arises a supernatural influ- 
ence added to the merely natural forces of man, besides the attributes 
we cited in the example of the Byzantine hymn. 

We shall have to come back to this subject for the background of 
possible erotic experience it presents. Now we shall just say that it is 
not foreign to magic. One of its dark aspects appears in the phenomena 
of possession by succubi and incubi, which have been recorded since 
the days of the Sumerians. Let us cite the following passage from 
Paracelsus: "This fantasy arises from the astral body as if by virtue of 
heroic lovej it is an action that is not fulfilled in carnal union. In 
isolation such a love is, at one and the same time, father and mother 
of the spiritual seed. From this psychic seed spring the incubi which 
oppress women and the succubi which attack men," 29 This is what 
the Germans called the Alpminne in the Middle Ages, Paracelsus was 
alluding here in a cryptic language to the evocatory power of the 
imagination that can lead to psychic contacts with the supersensual 
capabilities of sex, and awaken feelings of such intensity that they can 
cause hallucinations. The less dark and involuntary varieties of this 
phenomenon are understood thus by De Guaita; "The incubus and 
succubus are two ghostly forms of a 'convertible hermaphroditism/ 
which is now predominantly phallic and now predominantly in the 
form of the female sexual organs." 30 This is a matter of special 
impelling forms of absolute union of the male and female principles, 
the union developing, however, along an obsessive line because of 
the subject's passivity vis-a-vis the development of the experience 
itself, which does not take place on the material plane. In actual fact 
the same result, almost an obsession, also can result from the 
initiatory forms of sexual magic when they fail or are deflected from 
their real purpose, this is an interesting similarity because in this case 
the intention and aim are clearly known. In these circumstances real 
and objective forces play a part. We can distinguish between the 
sexual fantasies common to certain schizophrenic states and 
possession by incubi or succubi, by the extranormal phenomena that 
frequently accompany true "possession"; this explains the events 
i hat happened as late as the eighteenth century in the Convent of the 
Ursulines at Loudun. Such "prodigies" were recorded during the 
arousal of maenads arid bacchantes who fell themselves possessed by 
i lie god; Pliny and Euripides, for example, mention ruptures of level 
by means of sex which sometimes involved a removal of the boundary 
between ego and nature, resulting in interpenetration of the two 
spheres ("prodigies" in the former case and "hysterical obsessions" 
in I he inner). In general it is necessary to remember thai what is 
seldom fulfilled on llie material plane can reach forms of arousal on 
tin 1 subtle ami livpu physical plane, Willi all I lie related 
i onsei[iinu cs. 



188 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



We have seen that beyond all incidental conditional qualities, the 
foundation of all important erotic experience is the relationship 
established between a person and the essence or "being" of an indi- 
vidual of the opposite sex. This implies an evocatory process that in 
profane cros differs only because of its weaker degree and instinctive 
and unconscious form. Krafft-Ebing rightly saw in all love a 
phenomenon of "fetishism" but recorded that this word, originating 
in the Portuguese language, really meant "enchantment"; it should 
be understood as referring to an emotion "which is in no way justified 
by the intrinsic value or reality of the symbolic object," namely of the 
person or part of the person or thing that provokes the erotic 
arousal. 32 

Havelock Ellis took up the same idea. After recognizing that in 
"erotic symbolism" the part can represent and evoke the whole and 
explaining the basis of amorous fetishism in a specific or perverse 
sense (the aphrodisiac effect caused by a part of a woman or even by 
an object or garment belonging to her), he went a step further and 
saw the same phenomenon repeated on a large scale when the beloved 
"being" as a whole becomes a symbol that leads beyond her mere 
person, 33 If a woman or just her body excites and intoxicates, it is 
because she dimly calls forth something that transcends her; thus 
"fetishism" is a normal and constant fact., whereas abnormal, 
pathological fetishism represents only a deviated variety, which, 
however, has the same inner structure. 34 Evocation and fetishism are 
constant facts in every passion and all deep love and are connected to 
the lover's tendency to "idealize" the woman he loves as if she were a 
divine being and to make her the object of worship and veneration, 
even if in actuality she in no way deserves it. A deflection, however, 
takes place in the cases mentioned earlier (chapter 3) where the 
woman who is the cause of the evocation inverts the relationship and 
has such an intense life of her own that she absorbs, devours, or 
burns the image. This is what lies at the basis of the phenomenology 
of sexual slavery, whether psychic or physical. This phenomenology 
is unavoidably interwoven into love as we experience it today, and it 
paralyzes every "anagogie" capability of that love. 

We have just indicated a phenomenon of infatuation and of unwar- 
ranted "projection of value" (dictated, according to Schopenhauer, 
by the "genius of the species" for its own ends). When the intoxica- 
tion of the first love is dissipated and desire has been fully satisfied, 
the true reality of the idolized being should reappear in all its banali- 
ty. This interpretation is opposed to another that does nor exclude 
the possibility that there may indeed be present in varying degrees a 
process of evocation or magical fantasy, which is noi limited to 
subjective daydreaming bin is a kind of sixth sense allowing us In 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



189 



perceive that which is hidden and seems unreal but in fact has a 
higher degree of reality. In such cases the "woman of the mind" or 
"secret woman," of whom we wrote earlier, truly transports and 
fascinates us, and her being acts only as a means for the experience of 
her arousal. The primordial image that we bear deep within ourselves 
is activated by a certain person under certain circumstances, leading 
to a powerful, enraptured trance. The image that we have within us is 
also the eternal female perceived objectively in the beloved being, 
which then undergoes a very striking process of transubstantiation 
and transfiguration as in an epiphany or in a sacred manifestation of 
power. 35 This dangerous contact with the supersensual can last for 
one single exceptional moment or for an extended period of tension; 
however, in normal lovers it is not usually based on the awakening of 
strong emotional conditions. In love at first sight and in the so-called 
coup defoudre, the process is short-circuited. This state of affairs can 
also be brought about unexpectedly in a one-night encounter with a 
stranger and even with a whore. Such a miracle may never be 
repeated in a whole lifetime, notwithstanding all relationships of 
affection and human closeness to other women or the transparent 
nature of the beloved, and the action of her higher power in an 
"exalted" atmosphere of evocation and revelation may be stabilized 
for a certain length of time. 

As we said earlier, random causes should not be confused with 
essential facts, and it is necessary to bear in mind the margin of 
chance involved in externalities that enhance or condition the 
phenomenon. It may happen that the process is set off only in 
relation to a precise person. Here the most immediate biological, 
physical, and social qualities are obvious. An important part will be 
played, above all, by the ideal, not of an abstract beauty (the Platonic 
"beautiful in itself'), but of the type of beauty proper to a given race. 
For instance, it is unlikely that a man will find in a woman of a 
different race the incentive and basis to arouse the primordial image 
he has within himself. We should also consider the obvious 
conditional qualities of a biological character: aging, a fate to which 
man and, even mote so, woman are doomed. With old age and the 
weakening of the physical basis of sexual love, the very prop of 
magical evocation changes and fails, and everything lasting will have 
a different and only human quality. Thus one of Barbusse's 
characters, when talking about time "which is bound to us inside like 
an illness," says to the woman that she is precious in only one given 
moment. "1 think that this moment will not last any longer and that 
you will have to change and die, and that you are going away now 
even if you arc here." This is I he exist en I ial I raged vol all line love. In 
1:11-1 il is between j'jvru limits ol :u»e thai a woman especially is 



190 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



suitable for her possible metamorphosis (by means of the 
"attractions" she possesses during this period, woman seeks to bind 
to herself, as an empirical person, a man forever, generally by means 
of marriage). However, this concerns neither the reality of the 
archetype nor that of its evocation and perception, in its timeless 
essence, where it is not linked to the incidental and to the empirical 
and finite individual; it concerns only the circumstances necessary 
for the apparition but not the principle, which appears and which can 
withdraw once again, just as fire becomes invisible and returns to its 
potential state when the conditions for combustion are no longer 
present. It is natural, then, that the prosaic reality of a person 
resurfaces, but this does not justify interpretation of these 
phenomena as mere illusion and empty romanticism. 

In "Epipsychidion" Shelley wrote words to this effect: "Look 
there where a mortal divine form arises; life, love, and light belong to 
it, and a motion which may change but not be extinguished, the 
image of some bright eternity." Carpenter also expressed it fittingly: 

The young man sees the girl; it may be an ordinary face, a random figure 
from the most trivia! background. But that sets things going. A memory, 
a confused recollection arises. The outer mortal figure is pervaded with 
the inner immortal one and then there emerges in the consciousnes a 
bright and glorious form not belonging to this world. . . . The arousal of 
that image intoxicates man and it shines and burns within him. A god- 
dess, perhaps Venus herself, is standing in her holy temple; a feeling of 
splendor and awe invades him, and the world is transformed for 
him. . . ? He makes contact with the very real presence of a force . . . 
and feels this vaster life within himself, subjective and at the same time 
intensely objective. In fact, it is also evident that this woman, the mortal 
woman, who provokes such a vision, also has a close relationship to it as 
much more than just a mask or an empty formula that brings that vision 
to his mind. Inside her, as in the man, deep unconscious forces are 
acting, and this ecstatic appearance of the ideal in the man is linked to 
that force which (as an objective archetype) has acted so powerfully in the 
heredity of the woman and contributed to the molding of her form and 
figure. We should not wonder, therefore, that her form reminds him of 
it. In truth, when the man looks into her eyes, ho sees a life much deeper 
than she herself realizes and which belongs to him as well, an everlasting 
and wonderful life. That which is immortal in him looks at that which is 
immortal in her. and the gods descend to meet in them. 36 

The chapter from which this passage was taken is entitled "The Gods 
as Apparitions of the Race-Life." Apart from the idealizing and 
poetic ornamentation and the inherent biological emphasis, it 
expresses the archetypes in their aspect of molding forces of life, 
race, and species. 

There is, therefore, a continuity between ihal which happens in a 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



191 



certain degree in strong profane love and that which belongs to a 
plane of real and secret evocation. It has been called quite precisely 
coup defoudre. These erotic Hashes and hermaphroditic closings of 
circuits have the power to take us beyond, to a higher consciousness, 
just as certain initiations do. We have defined these facts in their 
most hermetic meanings when dealing with the liminal phenomeno- 
logy of profane eros and through our study of the practices of ancient 
sacred ceremonies. We can now give an adequate interpretation of 
the "platonic love" of the Middle Ages; this is an interesting example 
in which the phenomena we are dealing with are not exhausted in 
exceptional, individual, and random experiences but are offered 
within the framework of a tradition . 

Our next two sections will look at the chivalrous cult of women and 
the experiences of the "Worshippers of Love/' 

Evocation Processes in the Chivalrous Love of the Middle Ages 

First of all> let us circumscribe the areas that interest us. There 
certainly existed a tradition of troubadours and "courtly love" that is 
well understood by the historians of medieval customs and literature. 
There also existed real "courts of love" (ad, 1150 and 1200), which 
centered upon well-known women who actually lived, such as Queen 
Eleanor, the Countess of Flanders, the Countess of Champagne, 
Ermengilda Viscountess of Narbonne, Stephanetta of Baulx, 
Odalasia Viscountess of Avignon, and so on. In these courts the cult 
of women had a settled, stereotyped character, derived at least in part 
from the lack oi understanding by certain circles of an esoteric 
doctrine to which they faithfully adhered notwithstanding. The role 
of women in chivalry differed from their role in the courts of love and 
in the lays of the troubadours. For in the latter, women performed 
their role even to its ultimate conclusion. It is best to highlight the 
contrast between this part and the role of the majority of women of 
the era. In the Middle Ages women were not generally "idealized"' 
and in fact were rather mistreated. The behavior of their husbands 
was generally very rough, if not actually brutal. The women's habits 
could be quite free and were in no way fitted to the ideal of modesty 
and bashfulness; epic tales of the early Middle Ages often speak of 
women who undertook amorous adventures or courtships, while 
their men remained indifferent or merely acquiescent. Leaving aside 
the promiscuity of the baths (a duke of Burgundy described how the 
baths of Valenciennes provided everything for the needs of Venus, 
including brothels), young women were apt to undress the knights 
given hospitably in the castles and to keep ihcm company in bed at 
nighi; a certain (iilhiTi of Nngenl in the t well h ceiii my deplored the 
extent ol" feiiuile shainclessmss. As regards I ho behavior of men. 



192 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Meiners observed quite rightly that "in the Middle Ages there were 
never so many ladies and girls kidnapped and raped as in the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries when chivalry was at its height. 
During those two centuries , warriors had the right in war to violate 
the women and girls and to kill them thereafter. It was precisely the 
knights who ravished and slew the women and daughters of their foes 
and subjects without worrying that they were laying their own 
women and daughters open to the rights of reprisal." 37 

This picture may be a little exaggerated , yet overall the difference 
between actual sexual relations in the Middle Ages and the part that 
women played in certain knightly customs is indisputable. There- 
fore , it is likely that the knights had as their focus not real women but 
rather a "woman of the mind" linked to a practice of evocations, a 
"lady" who basically had an autonomous reality independent of the 
physical individual who could act perhaps as an aid and, in a certain 
way, embody her* The "lady" was actually imaginary, and it was on a 
subtle plane that the knight brought his love, desire, and exaltation 
into action. This is how we must understand everything that we have 
studied so far; in fact, the woman to whom a knight dedicated his life 
and for whom he performed dangerous undertakings was often 
chosen in such a way that the possibility of actually possessing her 
was excluded from the very beginning. She could belong to another 
man, and therefore hope of marriage was impossible; she might be 
renowned for cold unapproachability, though her "cruelty" was 
accepted and even exalted; she could even be the image of a woman 
who indeed existed but had never been seen. Nonetheless such a 
woman fed men's desire and drove them to service leading even to 
death, while in any other respects such men, as warriors, feudatories, 
and knights, obeyed no other law but their will, were not used to 
subjection or renunciation, and were averse to any sentimentality. In 
certain circles in Provence the name donnoi or donnei actually meant a 
kind of erotic relationship that, in principle, shunned the possession 
of women. In one illustration of the time, a man has his hands tied 
symbolically, and it was said that "he who wishes to possess his 
woman wholly, knows nothing ot donnoi." In other cases, the man 
already had and possessed a woman, but she was not the object of 
such an eros. 3K As we said earlier, we must think here of a silent will 
to prevent concrete erotic relations from marking the end of the inner 
tension (Rilke observed quite rightly that it seemed men feared the 
success of their courtship more than anything else); but, on the other 
hand, we should remember the facts that fit into the system of 
evocation of the female as such and of the absorption of the female 
and self-integral ion with heron a superphysical and invisible plane; 
such a stale is an approximation, alheii confused, !<> absolute 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



193 



possession of the "inner woman" and runs parallel to a constant urge 
toward self- transcendence (heroic undertakings, dangers, 
adventures, and every fanatical action done for the lady). For 
example, it is meaningful that the Crusades were often included 
among such deeds. The theology of the castles and courts of love 
commanded faithfulness to both God and "woman" and affirmed 
spiritual salvation of the knight who died for the woman of his mind; 
this takes us back to the idea of the immortalizing power belonging, 
in the end, to eros. Moreover, some information concerning the 
Templars is interesting as regards occult and hermaphroditic 
integration. It is said that "demons" came in the form of women to 
the Templar knights who practiced chastity, and that every knight 
had his own demon. 39 We can see clearly here the theme of the union 
with the female on a nonphyskal plane, a theme that we also meet in 
certain magical traditions and also mentioned by Paracelsus. 
Moreover, we should note that the "idol" used as the center of the 
secret rites of the Templars, Baphomet, was said by some people to 
resemble a hermaphroditic figure or even a Virgin. 

We should note that the Worshippers of Love, like the Templars 
(to whom they may have been linked historically), were an initiatory 
organization. A systematic and well-documented survey, which we 
owe mainly to Valli and Ricolfi, has confirmed and made public 
details that have been passed on among select circles about the basis 
of the poetry of the "sweet new style." The "sweet new style" of 
poetry employed a secret language that was fully understandable 
only to the initiates. The love exalted in that poetry was something 
other than idealized or uplifted profane emotion, and the women 
glorified in it were not actual women; this begins with Dante's 
Beatrice and the love described in his Vita nuova. 

We have already written about this subject elsewhere and will 
therefore content ourselves here with setting out the problem 
according to the special point of view that interests us. 

The proposition of Valli can be summarized as follows: "These 
poets, who lived in a mystical and initiatory environment and were 
seeking an art that was in no way art for art's sake or expressions for 
expression's sake, were wont to make out of all their feelings of love 
and of the true emotions which they fell in their love life a 'material' 
to express mystical and initiatory thoughts. The reality of their loves 
as men may have provided some true source of some image for their 
verses but was filtered through symbolism in such a way that this 
material of love came to have a 'truthful meaning,' that is to say, a 
significance of profound truth which was mystical and initiatory. A 
stream <>I initiatory I noughts was introduced at a certain point into 
I Ik* poetry of love [of the troubadour lype) and pervaded it link* by 



194 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



195 



little to such an extent that the great central nucleus of the poets of 
love that existed around Dante employed an artificial 'jargon' for the 
language of symbolic love." 40 Such was VaUTs opinion. For our part , 
we propose to add the following observations. 

First, Valli gives too much emphasis to that which in this poetry 
may have been linked to the militant wing of the Worshippers of 
Love. Starting with Dante, those poets were at the same time almost 
all party men and foes of the hegemonistic intrigues of the church. As 
to the essential nucleus of their works, it is wrong to say that it is 
merely an information bulletin produced among the members of the 
sect under poetic disguise (as Valli believed). They did not need to 
wait for inspiration nor to write in verse; other forms of secret com- 
munication would have been much more convenient and safer than 
poetry, which, although in code, was yet always available to every- 
one. 

The other and more important point is that there is no need to go 
beyond reason with a merely symbolical explanation, as Valli is in- 
clined to do. The various women celebrated by the Worshippers of 
Love, whatever their names might have been 5 were one single 
woman, an image of "Blessed Wisdom" or Gnosis, an image of a 
principle of enlightenment, salvation, and transcendental 
understanding. However, we are not dealing here with allegories or 
mere personified doctrinal abstractions, which the school of Dante 
had already supposed in Beatrice, The plane is that of an actual 
experience, as in the ancient mysteries and secret rites of the 
Templars. At the same time, we should understand that the choice of 
the symbolism of the woman and love was not accidental or 
meaningless; for they could have used any other material to express 
what they wanted to say and to mislead the profane crowd, as did the 
alchemists, for instance. Contrary to the beliefs of Valli (and of 
Rossetti, Aroux, and Guenon as well), in this case the experience for 
lovers was not limited to supplying random material for an artificial 
and symbolic language which would hide a true meaning, itself 
unrelated to eros (such as, for example, in the ecclesiastical use of 
amorous language in the Song of Songs); we should not therefore 
think that the words themselves might be transposed from an erotic 
to a mystical level. Some Eastern texts lend themselves to such a 
practice: the title of the Ananga Ranga, a treatise that is more than 
crude eroticism, can be translated as "The Bodiless One or the Hindu 
Art of Love" and its every stanza can have a sacred as well as a literal 
meaning. 41 Although here it is essentially a matter of the "initiatress" 
or "glorious woman of the mind" (as Dante called her and added, 
"She was called Beatrice by many who did not know what her name 
was"), i his woman was mil reduced lo a svnibol 



10 a svi 



uinoiifr | he 



L 



Worshippers of Love; instead we believe that contact with the occult 
force of womanhood played an essential part. Love aroused by real 
woman could be employed to develop the initiatory process. Only by 
looking at the question in this way can we take into account 
every thing that these poetic creations offer in terms of their lively, 
open-hearted humanity, pervaded with directness, spontaneity, and 
drama. The explanation of the "woman" as Blessed Wisdom 
personified or as a mere secret abstract doctrine (or as symbol of the 
organization that safeguarded it, according to Valli) does not in itself 
clarify the strong emotional experience and coups defoudre described 
suggestively in this literature. It is unlikely that the Worshippers of 
Love sexually used women to obtain this experience, as in the rites of 
Dionysus or Tantrism; no such information has come down to us, 
and the erotic references in almost all these poems are very restrained 
and far from daring. 

We must be dealing here, therefore, with the intermediate level we 
mentioned (neither that of mere uplifted human love nor that of sex- 
ual techniques) wherein the real woman is important but secondary 
because she merely acts as an aid to contacting the immaterial power 
of which she is, in principle, the living embodiment. Opposed to 
knightly devotion toward woman and their relative "exalted" states, 
the initiatory phenomenology and arrangements among the Wor- 
shippers of Love can be clearly seen. It was not a mailer of sporadic 
and isolated cases devoid of awareness of the process. Rather it was 
an orientation of a chain of practitioners, the full extent of which is 
perhaps unknown to us, for it may have included men who have left 
nothing behind them, neither verses nor other tangible traces. 

The Initiatory Experiences of the Worshippers of Love 

We must reiterate what we have set forth in other books on the essen- 
tial experiences of the Worshippers of Love. 42 The emergence of the 
initiatress through the ordinary woman was expressed clearly in 
some verses of Guido Cavalcanti, who seems to have been one of the 
heads of the organization: "I seem to see such a beautiful woman 
coming out of her lips that my mind cannot understand her, and that 
at once another woman of a new beauty is born of her, in which it 
seems that a star is moving and says, 'Your salvation has 
appeared. ' Besides Cavalcanti, Dante and Cino da Pistoia say that 
it is "by the virtue which my imagination gave to her," that Love 
takes a hold on the soul of its worshipper. We must also observe the 
ambiguity of meaning between salute (salvation) and saluto 
(greetings) in almost all the poetry of the New Style. The "greeting" 
of i lie mysterious woman, shown as being the end of love (Vita nuova, 
IS, 1 ), always confers "salvaiinns" on him who receives il;il favors an 



196 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



197 



experience and provokes a crisis from which spiritual salvation may 
come. Its power tests the lover's force and often even surpasses that 
force. In fact, Dante wrote , "He who is able to stay and look at [the 
woman] will become a noble thing or will die; and when she finds 
someone worthy to see her, he can prove thus the strength of his 
virtue , for that which gives "salvation* is happening to him." 44 
Linked to this is the vision in which Love is shown with the 
unwonted characteristics of a "Lord of awesome countenance," In 
his arms, said Dante, "I seemed to see a person sleeping 'naked' 
except that she appeared to be slightly wrapped in a bloody cloth, and 
looking at that person I knew that she was 'the woman of Salvation/ 
who had deigned to greet me the day before." 45 To arouse by love this 
woman who had been seen naked and sleeping and therefore 
latent — Hermetism calls her "our hidden Eve" 46 — means to allow a 
power to act on oneself which is capable of killing and provoking an 
initiatic death. In this literature, when the "woman of the mind" 
appears, "the heart is dead." On seeing the woman and receiving her 
"greeting/' Lapo Gianni said: "Then I forced myself not to fall 
down; my heart, which had been alive, became dead." Guido 
Guinizelli spoke of a greeting and a deadly look and compared 
himself to one "who saw his own death. It passes through the eyes 
just like thunder, which wounds through the window of the tower 
and breaks or cleaves in twain that which it finds inside." 47 Love 
warns him who wishes to see the woman: "Flee unless you want to 
die." 48 In such an experience, therefore, death should not be feared; 
in fact, a deep inner fracture may be its outcome. A song, perhaps 
written by Cavalcanti, spoke of "a new passion, such that I remained 
full of dread; a brake was applied to all my virtues suddenly, so that I 
fell to the ground, 'by a light which struck me in the heart'; and if the 
book is not mistaken, the stronger spirit trembled so greatly that it 
seemed 'that death had come for him in this world/ " Dante 
described this experience in similar terms: on perceiving the sudden 
approach of the "woman of the miracle," he felt all his spirits 
destroyed by the force of Love; there remained only his sight, which, 
however, was sundered from his physical organs, as in ecstatic 
rapture. Thus it seemed to Dante that he was falling to the ground, 
and he said, "I kept my feet on that part of life 'beyond which one 
cannot go if one wishes to return 3 ": later on he wrote about a 
"transfiguration 55 ; 49 in yet another passage he returned to the theme 
of the "destruction" worked by love. 50 Moreover, the teachings of 
the medieval Kabbala mention the mors osculi or death through the 
kiss, and similar expressions are also found in Arabic and Persian 
Sufi poetry. M 

If wc look at die writings of the Worshippers of Love as a whole, il 



l 



seems that sometimes it is the direct action of the woman (her appear- 
ance) and at other times her indirect action that produces these 
effects. Her image, her "greeting," and her idea transform Love 
from a potential state to an actual state in terms of a force that arouses 
fear and causes initiatic death. In this respect Cavalcanti spoke of an 
action on the "potential intellect," a term taken from the 
Aristotelianism of Averroes, where he called by the name "nous" the 
intellectual principle in its transcendental aspect, which in an 
ordinary man exists only potentially. 52 According to the path 
followed by a true Worshipper of Love, therefore, it is by means of 
the woman as life that this potential is actualized or becomes real in 
his consciousness and transforms him. Cavalcanti wrote of "you who 
pass through my eyes to my heart and awaken the intellect that was 
asleep," and he added that "Love takes up its place and dwelling in 
the potential intellect as a subject." Guinizelli indicated the "heart* ' 
as being the seat of the "nobility," which becomes real through 
women. In the development of the experience, therefore, the 
emotional and traumatic moment seems to change into a pure 
intellectual act (the "rebirth of the intellect" of which the Corpus 
hermeticum wrote). This nobility (Love, too, is called the "Lord of 
nobility"), actualized by woman in the ecstasy that she provokes, is 
an ontological perfection linked to the reawakening of the intellectual 
essence; in everything, said Dante, who also cited 
Aristotle, 53 nobility is the perfection of its nature, and in this regard 
the act of denuding and the symbolism of nakedness are again 
mentioned: Love has the power to make the spirit come out from its 
"lodging" and to "make it fly without covering."^ 4 

In general, the recurring theme with these writers is a crisis 
followed by the beginning of a new or transformed life, and explicit 
references to the mystery of the hermaphrodite are often present. Da 
Barberino 55 made Love say, "Something of such a strong nature 
struck him that some people think he died because of it; but he found 
himself again in a higher life. 51 He ranked degrees oi experience in a 
hierarchy. In an illustration in his book Love Documrvts? we can see 
symmetrical male and female figures which, as is obvious and as Valli 
had already noted, 56 are taken in pairs. Men and women are struck 
by the arrows of Love more or less heavily; in the beginning they fall 
to the ground, but as they draw near to a central figure, they stand up 
and hold roses as a symbol of their initiatory rebirth. After the last 
couple, who bear the inscription "From this death life will follow," 
there are no longer a separate man and a separate woman but one 
single hermaphroditic figure, above which Love, himself holding 
some roses, takes nil in llighi on a while steed. The hermaphroditic 
figuiv has ;iu inscription with ilu- words lL Lovt\*you have inside ns 



198 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



one instead of two with higher virtue through wedlock." The key 
meanings could not be given more clearly: after the crisis, which even 
in the first degrees wounds, topples, and slays, the union with the 
woman and the "higher virtue of wedlock" lead to the hermaphrodite 
(which in the picture is represented exactly like the hermetic Rebis), 
a state after which Love will develop the higher experience in a flight 
or transcendental rapture. In facts another Worshipper of Love, 
Nicolo de Rossi, when dealing with "grades and virtues of true 
love," considered their zenith to be the ecstasy which is called death 
of the mind and adds, "just as Paul was carried away," which means 
the opening of the spirit to superindividual and supernatural states of 
being. 

It is interesting that Dante linked to the action of Love a fettering 
and enthraldom of the "vital spirit" or naturalistic, jih part of being, 
which he made to exclaim, "Behold the God who is stronger than I 
and, coining, will govern me." 5 ' It is as if, through the awakening of 
a higher principle (the "potential intellect" or nous, realized the 
"nobility" or, in Hindu wording, the luminous Shiva principle)., a 
new precedence of rank were established among the various powers 
of the human being. In the Symposium y although an allegoric and 
learned interpretation predominates over an anagogic and initiatory 
one (it is at the former that Dante said explicitly that we should stop), 
the "miraculous woman of virtue" is said to arouse a 
"straightforward appetite," which "upsets and destroys its 
opposite"; from her issues a fire "which breaks the inborn or natural 
vices" and she has the "power to renew the nature of those who look 
at her, which is a miraculous thing." 58 The "salvation" achieved 
through the awakening and renovation of the inner power of being 
ensures participation in everlasting initiatory life. We have already 
mentioned the established etymology, which a Provencal exponent 
of the same faith, Giacomo di Baisieux, used in identifying love with 
the "deathless" and with the destruction of death; he spoke of lovers 
as "these who die not" and will live "in another century of joy and 
glory," 9 In any event, among the Worshippers of Love the concept 
remains well established that the union with woman leads to the 
possibility of a higher life, so that if she were to be separated from 
man, he would again face the shadow of death. 60 In fact, Cecco 
d'Ascoli said, "I am transformed into the third heaven in this 
Woman, so that I know not who I was* Wherefore I feel more blessed 
every hour. My intellect took form from her as her eyes showed me 
salvation, as I looked at the virtue in her countenance. Therefore I 
am She; 'and if she sunders herself from me, I shall then feel the 
shadow of death.'" 61 

We shall end this section by mentioning two mure points. The first 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



199 



concerns the symbolism of numbers. We know the part played by the 
number three together with its multiples both in the principal work 
of Dante and in his Vita nuova. In the latter, the first power of three 
(three squared), or nine, is given particular importance. At the first 
meeting, the woman was nine years old (and that, given the traumatic 
effects produced by the sight of her, should be enough to set aside the 
literal interpretation of Beatrice as a young girl of that age). It was at 
the ninth hour that the greeting took place, as also did one of the most 
significant visions recounted by the poet. The name of his own 
woman, Dante tells us, "could not bear to be in a number other than 
nine." The number nine reappears as the duration of a certain painful 
illness of Dante. 62 In explaining this, Dante only says that "the 
number three is the root of nine and makes nine by itself (i.e., 
multiplied by itself) without needing any other number." As regards 
three, he refers to the Christian Trinity and calls it the "factor by 
itself of miracles" and ends by saying, "This woman was 
accompanied by this number, nine, so as to give us to understand 
that she was a nine, that is, a miracle, the root of which is only the 
wonderful Trinity." 63 This is basically only half of the matter, for a 
more precise and universal side of the symbolism of three and its 
powers was undoubtedly known in Dante's circles. We have already 
noted how three is the number ofyang and how it also meant that 
which arises from the union of the One with the female number, the 
Two, and then leads back beyond the Two to unity. 64 In ancient 
Egypt three was the number of lightning but also that of vital force 
and of the invisible life-being enclosed within the body, the ka. 
Moreover, nine was also linked to yang, as also was eighty -one, so 
much so that the latter number plays a strange part in a detail of 
Taoist sexual techniques. The significance of nine lies in it being the 
first power of three, whereas the importance of eighty-one is that it is 
the perfect power of three (3 3 ). In a certain way, eighty-one takes us 
beyond the experience of the "woman of the miracle," and it is 
important that Dante himself in the Cotwivio spoke of it and gave it as 
the "age" of a perfect and completed life; he recalled that it was 
Plato's age and even said that Christ would have reached that age if he 
had not been crucified. But this symbolic age figures in other 
traditions too, and the same age was attributed to Lao-tze. Overall, 
this relates to cycles of fulfillment of the One, which is renewed 
through the Dyad or female, developing as the act or power of itself 
until it is identical to this particular power of itself and is established 
in "nobililv." Now, Dante, who made Beatrice die on the ninth day 
of June, also observed that in Syria, June is the ninth month, and he 
noted lastly llial her death happened when "the perfect number, 
nine, was fulfill* J/ 1 that is, in 'Kl in the thirteenth century. 



200 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The other point we wished to mention concerns the death of 
Beatrice. First Perez and afterward Valli 65 linked this death to that of 
Rachel in the Bible and recalled how Agostino and Riccardo of San 
Vittore assumed the death of Rachel as a symbol of ecstasy, the 
excessus mentis or death of the mind. Valli thought that the woman's 
death in the Vita nuova was "a representation of the transcendence of 
the mind beyond itself during the act of pure contemplation, a 
mystical representation of the mind which is lost in God." 66 But we 
do not agree> for it only concerns more than the merely mystical 
plane, which is not that of the Worshippers of Love, but also, in our 
view, actually inverts the situation. It is certain that the woman's 
death marks the last phase of the experience that began with her 
"greeting," and there are some enigmatic expressions concerning 
this in chapter 27 of the Vila nuova. After having referred to the death 
of Beatrice, Dante added the mysterious words "It is not fitting for 
me to talk of that event because, if I were to do so, I should have to 
praise myself/* just as if the event, Beatrice's death, would resound 
to his glory. The mystical interpretation put forward by Valli does 
not fit the circumstances, for if it had been a matter of the death of the 
mind ("the killing of the intellect," of the manas of yoga 
terminology), we would have merely been dealing with one of the 
effects of woman and Love on the lover, leaving aside the point that 
death, interpreted as a mystical shipwreck, would then concern not 
the woman but the Worshippers of Love; whereas the opposite is 
stated, and it was the woman who died, to the glory of the 
Worshippers of Love. We do not deem the opposite idea too rash, 
namely that the last term of the experience is represented by 
surmounting the woman in the fully realized reintegration. This is 
what corresponds in Hermetism to the "Red Interaction" (or Red 
Opus) after the "White Interaction" (which is preceded by the 
"Black Interaction" or death or dissolution), namely a condition of 
manhood reestablished beyond the ecstatic opening. This is the final 
state for which, also in Hermetism, there was sometimes mentioned a 
killing of her by whom one had been killed but also been 
"regenerated." Furthermore, as we have seen, besides the number 
nine, Dante made eighty-one the number for the death of the 
woman. 

We are also led toward this explanation by a point that has not been 
sufficiently emphasized: in Christian mysticism the soul acts as a 
female who is the "fiancee" of the heavenly bridegroom: in all this 
literature and in the symbolism of woman recorded in sagas and 
myths, the parts are generally reversed, and it is the subject of the 
experience who has the male quality; 67 nor, indeed, could we expect 
anything else if the Worshippers of Love were an organ iza I ion for 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



201 



initiation and not mysticism. One last anomaly is significant: Guido 
Cavalcanti, who must have been one of the leaders of the 
organization, stated that Love arises from and dwells in the sky of 
Mars, not of Venus ("who comes from and dwells with Mars"); and it 
seems that Dante shared this opinion tacitly. The significance of this 
will not escape anyone. 

We have dwelled somewhat on the subject of the Worshippers of 
Love because they enable us to establish to a certain degree a bridge 
between some of the main themes emphasized in our own investiga- 
tion and the field of profane love as well. Speaking of profane love, 
Knut Hamsun went so far as to call it "a power that can bring man 
down to nothing and then raise him up again and mark him with its 
scorching brand," Stendhal uses the following words for an actual 
case of the coup de foudre: "A higher force of which I am afraid took 
me out of myself and out of reason." On feeling the breath of Lotte, 
Werther said, "I feel myself thrown down as if struck by lightning." 
The Worshippers of Love shared the same experiences and deve- 
loped and integrated them outside of any sentimentality. This 
subject is precise and recurs in their works. Other recurring themes 
include rapture and death, the profound significance of the heart, 
trauma in the heart considered as a secret place ("the very secret 
chamber of the heart," as Dante said) and as a place to be purified 
("the tender heart") because it is in the heart that the dazzling 
mystery of the Three will begin, owing to the effect of the woman- 
miracle and of the "Lord of nobility." 

In conclusion, we must reject the aesthetic and literal interpreta- 
tions that attempt to link everything to real women and to experi- 
ences of merely human love transposed, uplifted, and expressed in 
high-flown language by the poet. We must also reject merely 
symbolic interpretations that only introduce learned abstractions or 
even personifications of an Understanding ("Blessed Wisdom") as an 
enlightening power, which, nevertheless, is unrelated to the power of 
femininity. This last interpretation was followed not only by Valli 
but also by Guenon and Reghini; these explanations may be 
acceptable in the case of mystical teachings based more or less on 
Neoplatonism (including Bruno's) or even in the case of the Arab and 
Persian poetry that flourished between the ninth and fourteenth 
centuries, but they are not complete, in our opinion, as regards the 
Worshippers of Love. For them, the alternative is transcended, and 
we should consider their essential basis to be the possibility of 
evocations and contacts for initiative purposes with the occult female 
principle in a liminal and nonmaierial field. Beyond this, there is 
only real sexual magic, sin extreme development oi the capability ol 
ei os at ;i iioiiprolane level. This sphere remains In he dealt with /The 



202 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



third of the solutions listed at the beginning of this chapter is that of 
the transmutations of the force of sex through asceticism and yoga. 
Besides, in evocation and participation we can distinguish two 
paths that run under the signs of Demeter and Durga, the two basic 
female archetypes. The first is based on the mother-father principle 
considered as the source of holiness, and leads toward life everlast- 
ing, peace, and light. In the profane and human field, this can come 
to a man who takes shelter near a maternal woman; Pythagoreanism 
recognizes in woman a special holiness and even talks of the "initia- 
tory mother/' ti metri teleie (perfect mother); this trend is manifested 
in the fact that after his death Pythagoras' house was turned into a 
shrine of Demeter. This feminine archetype finds strong expression 
in the myth of the heavenly Virgin and divine mediating Mother. 
The other path runs, instead, under the sign of Durga, the dcpthless 
Aphroditic female, and may either be the road to perdition or the 
means of surpassing the Mother under the sign of the Great 
Mysteries. 



Appendix 

The Meaning of the Sabbat and the Black Mass 

As a supplement to what we have written concerning supersensual 
evocations with an erotic basis, we may touch briefly here on the con- 
tent of the experiences of the Sabbat and the so-called Black Mass. 

The demonology of past centuries is in general an interesting field, 
but it has never been studied from the right perspective. The correct 
point of view is neither that of theologians who ascribe everything to 
Satanism, as did the judges of the Inquisition, nor that of rationalists 
w T ho blame everything on superstition, psych opathology, and hyste- 
ria. Psychiatrists and psychoanalysts have sought to eliminate any 
theological and supernatural interpretation. They argue that simple 
psychotherapy has led to the disappearance of phenomena formerly 
attributed to diabolical influence. This confirms the superficial 
nature of what the general consensus deems "scientific" or 
"positive." Certain individuals show real psychic disorders and have 
defective constitutions, which allow for supersensual manifestations. 
Moreover, in these cases, it is obvious that when one succeeds in 
"healing" the individual, the basis of these manifestations will 
disappear and they will end; but that will teach us nothing about their 
true nature or their profound dimension. 

As regards the Sabbat, even if we give a wide margin to what has 
been attributed to mere superstition and suggestion (either autosug- 
gestion or brainwashing applied to defendants in trials), V ei eeriain 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



203 



facts of inner "experience" with a sufficiently constant and typical 
structure have been witnessed. In order to "enhance" these experien- 
ces in certain individuals, who may or may not have been 
predisposed toward them, substances were used which had effects 
like those of love potions. From the material point of view we find 
aphrodisiac powders and also narcotic and stupefying substances. 
The texts of the day speak of deadly nightshade, opium, wolfsbane, 
four-leaf clover, henbane, poplar leaves, certain kinds of poppies, 
and so on, mixed with special animal fats and made into an ointment 
that was absorbed through the skin, causing a twofold intoxication: 
either deep sleep, which liberated the plastic power of the 
imagination to produce images, lucid dreams, and visions, or the 
reawakening of the elementary sex drive and its arousal on this 
ecstatic, visionary, and imaginative plane- Furthermore, the writers 
speak of a ritual consecration of these substances. For example, it 
was said: "In this composition they do not forget a special invocation 
of their devils and of magic ceremonies instituted by them." 68 This 
obviously alluded to a secret operation intended to give a special 
"direction of efficiency" to the action of the drugs in question. This 
factor clearly must have had a fundamental importance. Whether or 
not we acknowledge its reality will depend on the extent to which we 
believe, for instance, that the sacraments are more than merely 
symbolic ceremonies. It is most likely that we owe to that factor the 
difference between the generic and disorderly action that some drugs 
and aphrodisiacs produce today and the specific action that led to the 
experiences of the Sabbat. Another essential factor must have been 
the existence of a "tradition"; a determined set of images must have 
been evoked through a collective psychic current, into which the 
individual was introduced through joining the group of 
practitioners. This explains the considerable agreement regarding 
the fundamental experiences. Contrary to Bodin, Johannes Vierus in 
his Daemonomania upheld the proposition that these experiences, 
although having a supernatural influence (the Devil) as their basis, 
took place in a state of trance, the body remaining motionless 
although the subject believed he was physically present at the 
Sabbat. Gdrrcs recorded certain experiments conducted in the 
fourteenth century by a Benedictine monk (other men later repeated 
them, including Gassendi himself) on persons who, after carrying 
out the ritual preparations to go to the Sabbat, were tied to their beds 
and observed. They often fell into a lethargic or cataleptic sleep so 
deep that not even burns or pin pricks could wake them . It has always 
been insisted thai "to betake oneself to the Sabbat" it was neeccssary 
lo fall asleep afier being anointed and reciting specific formulas. 
Thus the simples! inicrpiviatum is ihm of orgies of the emtio 



204 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



205 



imagination experienced during sleep. But traditional Hindu 
teachings differentiate mere subjective illusion or dreaming from a 
change in level of consciousness or the virtual displacement of 
consciousness to the "subtle." De Mynauld described certain 
ointments capable of causing "a transport that does not take place 
merely in an illusion^ for a state of deep sleep exists"; that is, an out- 
of-body experience. 

To accept this, we must first accept the premise that such 
phenomena have been accounted even in the lives of some Christian 
saints. However, we should note that in the experiments we 
mentioned earlier, more cases of double existence were confirmed at 
least in the sense that a person lying still and senseless on his bed 
owing to the effect of drugs could sometimes tell exactly what was 
happening in his environment (Gorres). Therefore, we should not 
exclude the possibility of experiences that, although of an essentially 
psychic nature, are not merely subjective dreams or the 

hallucinations of schizophrenics but possess an objective dimension 
of their own. 

Nor should we exclude the possibility of very ancient^ ecstatic rites 
that continued to be practiced in the Middle Ages and culminated in 
the sexual act, as if in a sacrament, which had many of the character- 
istics attributed to the Sabbat. Thus a horned god by the name of 
Cernunnos was celebrated; an altar dedicated to him has been found 
beneath the foundations of the Cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris. 70 
Moreover, we should note that spontaneous confessions were made 
without torture by participants in this ceremony, who died without 
fear or remorse, convinced that they had gained everlasting life. 
Some young women declared that they had gone to the rite because 
their hearts and wills had been enraptured by the god. They stated 
that he was the "supreme religion," that the Sabbat was the true para- 
dise which bestowed indescribable pleasures so ecstatic that they had 
shed the weight of their bodies and taken new bodies like "those of 
the angels"; they were proud of their experiences and met their 
deaths with the same calm steadfastness as the first Christians. 71 

But we are dealing here essentially with hazy evocations of arche- 
types and ritual conditions imitating ancient orgiastic cults. If we so 
wish, we can relate these to the collective subconscious considered as 
a receptacle of images capable of being reawakened and revitalized on 
the subtle plane; however, remnants of every kind in the individual 
subconscious are mingled therewith, for the subjects of such expe- 
riences belonged to the general populace and had neither training nor 
tradition comparable to those of the ancient mysteries. Moreover, we 
should take into account here the fact of a specific distortion or degra- 
dation due to the milieu of Christianity, which assigned a sinful 



i 



character to everything linked to sex. Under such circumstances and 
in a system of confused and disorderly evocations, "devilish" forms 
and forms of antinomy may well be brought about in the 
manifestations. Demonism is often only a distortion of themes and 
figures belonging to a previous, ousted cult against the background 
of the new one that replaced it. Many examples of this can be found in 
the history of religions. In the mechanism of the subconscious, when 
psychic remains of such a kind are revitalized, it is easy for them 
automatically to assume antagonistic, devilish, and even Satanic 
images. 72 Therefore, we should deem that in the case of experiences 
such as those of the Sabbat, anyone who underwent them took little 
account of their real content and only experienced that content 
indirectly through the swiftly changing images of the witches' 
Sabbat, so that he made confessions in good faith which conformed 
precisely to the diabolic scenario already made up by the judges of the 
Inquisition. 

Last, we ought to refer to the animal element present in such phan- 
tasmagoria. We should bear in mind here also the effects of an agita- 
tion of the deepest and prepersonal layers of being, where there are 
latent animal potentialities excluded from the evolutionary process. 
These potentialities, which play an important part in the totemism, 
can also be activated and involved in the evocatory process so as to 
produce by projection human-animal images or animallike deforma- 
tions of the human figure which correspond generally to the more 
degraded and formless content aroused in the overall process. But 
from every other angle this process can be considered like the Diony- 
siac rejection of inhibitions and the ancient rites of erotic and orgias- 
tic initiation. 

Using information provided by writers who have dealt with this 
subject over past centuries, such as Buguet, N. Remigius, Rodin, 
Del Rio, Binsfeldius, and Dom Calmet, De Guaita actually recon- 
structed the prevalent structure of the experiences of the Sabbat in 
the following terms. 73 At the diabolical meeting the "queen of the 
Sabbat" appeared as a young naked woman, often a virgin, having a 
particular beauty and borne on a black ram (Pierre de Lancre wrote, 
"All of those whom we have seen chosen for the title of queens were 
sweet and were more marked for beauty than the others"). The virgin 
was initiated by the persons officiating with successive sacraments, 
was anointed, and was then violated on an altar. According to a 
witness, this made her undergo "a wonderful and dreadful torment." 
A general orgy followed in which the antagonistic mode of 
nianifcsiaiion of elementary eros in the free and formless slate ended 
in adulterous, ineesl nous, or u imam nil unions and a gang rape of (he 
new prirsfess. On her supine body, as if on a ihiohbingaliar, ilie ' 



IK V 



206 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



goat of the Sabbat, now in human or semihuman guise, officiated, 
offering grain to the "Spirit of the Earth," the principle of all 
fecundity. Sometimes birds were released as a symbolic rite of 
liberation for the attendants of the Sabbat (an evocation of the "devil 
of freedom" perhaps; but one name of Dionysus at Rome was also 
"Free")- A cake was sometimes kneaded to carry out a wedding 
offering or a communion by shared consumption of the cake. It is 
said that at the end the queen of the Sabbat rose and, as a triumphant 
victim, called out formulas such as "Lightning of God, strike if you 
dare" (in a similar rite with a sexual background, observed in 
Slavonia until the twelfth century, it is related that the formula was 
"Let us be merry today, for Christ is conquered"). 74 An objective 
clement existed in that anyone who took pari in this orgiastic 
initiation obtained the secrets of compounding love potions, poi- 
sons, or elixirs. The possession of such gifts is strongly attested. 75 
According to information available from the trials, Diana was 
often invoked in the Sabbat (until the sixteenth century, "ire ad 
ludum Dianae" or "to go to Diana's game" meant the same as going to 
the Sabbat) together with Lucifer, a clearly "inverted" transposition 
of the male god of light. 76 As is well known, a certain figure in the 
Germanic World was Vrowe Holda with her ambivalent 
characteristics, gentle and dreadful, bestower of grace and destroyer, 
characteristics already noted by us in the female archetype. The 
mountain of the witches' Sabbat and the night of Valpurga were 
confused with the mount where Venus abode, the mountain being 
transformed into a devilish place of sin according to Christian views. 
It is not devoid of meaning that the actual rites should be held near 
the ruins of heathen temples or ancient ruins (for instance, the 
summit of the Puy-de-D6me in Auvergne, where the remains of a 
temple of Hermes are situated) or dolmens and other megalithic 
monuments. 

It has often been observed that in the scenario of the phantasma- 
goria of the witches' Sabbat the hircus sacer reappears in the form of 
the he-goat, the holy symbolic animal (identified by the Greeks 
sometimes with Pan and sometimes with Dionysus) who possessed 
young women in the sense of a holy marriage in one of the cults of 
ancient Egypt, whereas the naked woman worshipped as the living 
goddess is a variant of an ancient Mediterranean theme. We have 
already recounted how in the Aegean area, for instance, the cult of 
the goddess was confused with that of her priestess and how similar 
traces persist in the secret orgiastic ceremonies of certain Slavic sects. 
Even if only tendentially, ritual structures like those of the Sabbat 
have been attributed to the Gnostics. Thus it is related that Marcus 
the Gnostic violated some young girls who had been persuaded to 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



207 



L 



climb on an altar, and in this way he consecrated them and made 
them become prophetesses. Where such cases had validity, it was 
obviously a question of technique of sexual initiation. As regards the 
ancient world, moreover, Pliny 77 has told us of witches' Sabbats by 
night on Mount Atlas, with unbridled dances and an orgiastic 
unleashing of the elementary forces of man together with the 
presence or manifestation of ancient nature gods and goddesses. We 
should think, therefore, of the basis of the Sabbat as a reactivation of 
these ritual structures based on an obscure liberation of energies on 
the subtle plane, whereon archetypal forces can work effectively and 
forms of ecstasy can occur that can seldom be attained within the 
field of normal waking consciousness. Furthermore, we shall prove 
that, if rites carried out with human persons, material actions, and 
physical accessories have any efficacy, it is because consciousness is 
transported onto the subtle plane. 

We have already remarked on the technical reason that makes the 
experience diabolical, owing to the part played by Christianity's re- 
pression and theological condemnation of sexuality. But in principle 
we should also consider the possibility of a conscious "instrumental" 
use of everything having the character of a devilish and formless sub- 
stratum held in check by the forms of a given religion; such a use 
would be arranged for the purpose of a special transcendence of these 
forms and a potential participation in a state free from conditions. 
We should be able to say, perhaps more clearly, that in such cases 
where the form is presented as a limitation, that which is "below" the 
form is called into use daringly as a means "against form" so as to 
reach that which is "above" form (to this there correspond, particu- 
larly in the theistic religions, special divine figures, dogmas, positive 
rules, prohibitions, and so on). In anomalous cases where, notwith- 
standing everything, we remain in the psychic current of the corre- 
sponding tradition, such a technique from the outside can actually 
show the characteristics of a countcrreligion, inverted religion, or 
Satanism. 

In such a context we may refer to a particular detail In a descrip- 
tion of the Sabbat it is said that an obscene kiss, osculvm sub cauda or 
kiss below the tail, which those taking part should have given to the 
god of the rite, to the image or the man who was officiating and repre- 
senting the god, was a chrism of their "satanic" faith. Other wit- 
nesses, however, said clearly that no such rite was required. In this 
we may be dealing with an unbelievably and obscenely twisted 
version of something wholly different. De Lane re wrote that the 
actual thing in question here might be another face, a black one, 
whit h the idol or person officiating had behind him, perhaps like a 
mask at! ached in I lie impeol die neck, as if on ahead of Janus. 7 * 4 This 



208 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



symbolism is clear enough; if the light-colored face at the front 
represented the "outer" manifested God, the rear black face 
represented the depthless, formless divinity ranking higher than the 
outer God, In the Egyptian mysteries, the formula of the ultimate 
secret referred to Osiris as a black god; besides, we can find accurate 
references to that divinity in early Greek Christian patristics, which 
was influenced by the teachings of the mysteries and Neoplatonism 
(Dionysius and Areopagite, for instance). And so this matter may 
have been distorted into an obscene rite of witchcraft instead of a true 
profession of faith or "worship" of the formless divinity which 
employed the lower to reach the higher, namely the "black God," the 
Deus Ignotus or Unknown God. But it is hard to say to what extent 
this may be the case in some ceremonies and obscure cults,, among 
which may be numbered the Black Masses ihernselves. 

If the information at our disposal regarding the actual celebration 
of the Black Mass is scanty and untrustworthy, yet the technique of a 
diabolical inversion of the Catholic ritual is the subject of adequate 
evidence. We may set aside here the merely blasphemous, ludicrous, 
and sacrilegious version belonging to descriptions such as the fanci- 
ful version of Huysmans, The little that we do know concerns actions 
having purposes that were vilely magical rather than ecstatic, as was 
the case in the Black Mass that Catherine de' Medici caused to be per- 
formed. The structure of the ceremony shows traces of similarity to 
the ancient rites of the Aphroditic mysteries, and what was expe- 
rienced in the phantasmagoria of the Sabbat was partly carried out 
here on the plane of reality. Indeed, the center of the rite considered 
of a naked woman stretched out on the altar and herself acting as an 
altar. The position she sometimes assumed, with her legs spread 
open so as to show her sex, the os sacrum or "sacred mouth," in the 
words of a Hermetic witness, was the same as in the representations 
of some ancient female goddesses of the Mediterranean. Besides the 
inverted performance of the Mass, it seems that the rite consisted of 
the same developments as those we described earlier with regard to 
the Sabbat. The most abominable detail, namely the possible 
sacrifice of a baby before the altar, was not only a devilish imitation of 
the Eucharistic sacrificial rite of the Mass but also referred to the 
theme of the sacrifices and pouring of blood in which the Goddess, in 
some forms of the ancient belief, took delight. On the other hand, 
this might be a magical technique intended to provide a body for for 
the real presence of that goddess. A detail that is important not only 
as regards this particular point but in general is as follows: it was 
deemed absolutely necessary that the rite as a whole should be 
performed by a properly ordained priest. In fact, according in 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



209 



Catholic doctrine, apart from a man who may be directly consecrated 
by the Lord, only a priest can effect the mystery of transubstantiation 
by means of an objective power which he may be forbidden by 
interdict to exercise but which cannot be destroyed or revoked owing 
to its indelible character established by ordination. Now, the rites we 
have mentioned can possess some efficacy only on condition that the 
person officiating has the same power of transubstantiation, a power 
that can call forth and awaken actual presences in susceptible species, 
not only in inanimate things (as in the host of the Eucharist) but also 
in human beings. A "mystery" of this kind is supposed to take place 
in the very person of the naked woman lying on the altar, so that there 
is provoked in her a momentary, magical embodiment of the 
arch type, the power of transcendental woman and the goddess. If we 
suppose that this supersensual force was evoked, then an operational 
use of it could be imagined. We need only think that the employment 
of the technique of the countcrrcligion together with the arousal of 
everything formless and "hellish" which is held in check by a 
historical tradition, involves a heavy risk and presupposes in the 
persons officiating a specific and exceptional skill so as to prevent it 
from becoming truly satanic in the worst meaning of the word. The 
danger is less where such rites of sexual magic fit into the background 
of a sympathetic tradition and do not have recourse to the technique 
of inversion, and are thus devoid of an anlinomial character, as we 
shall show shortly. 

It seems that the divinity in the practices of black magic in the 
seventeenth and nineteenth centuries was female. She was called 
Astaroth, a name having the same root as Astarte, Ashtoreth, Attar, 
Ash-tur-tu, and so on, which leads us to believe that it was linked to 
Astartc-Ishtar (in Semitic languages oth, as in Astaroth, is a plural 
ending), even if the sex of the divinity was not determined. 
Sometimes women officiated at the Black Masses. 

As a last point concerning only the Sabbat, we shall observe that, 
besides using the same means, experiences of this kind on the subtle 
plane are hard for modern man to conceive of, since they are more 
than mere orgies in dreams belonging to die individual erotic imagi- 
nation, but rather imply real contacts and evocations. The necessary 
psychic atmosphere is no longer available, and a process of increased 
attention to the physical has shut the individual within himself in his 
mere subjectivity. Apart from truly exceptional cases, the only plane 
nowadays for possible experiences beyond the normal psychic 
processes is such that, as a rule, those experiences are suited to banal 
interpretations such as that of Jung or else fit into the "psychedelic" 
sphere because of the profane and disorderly use of certain drugs. 



eSi 



210 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The Doctrine of the Hermaphrodite in Christian Mysticism 

We saw in Scotus Eriugena that the doctrine of the hermaphrodite 
had appeared within the framework of Christian theology. Without 
any visible link to Scotus but beginning, instead, with Jakob 
Boehme, the same theme comes to light again in a little-known group 
of mystical and explanatory writers who, while remaining essentially 
within the fold of Christianity, sought to show the differentiation of 
the sexes as an outcome of the fall of primordial man, who had been 
created by God in the beginning in his own image, male and female, 
and therefore a hermaphrodite. 

We mentioned that the Kabbala had already sought to give this 
meaning to the biblical myth, and in particular that Leo the Hebrew 
had attempted explicitly to make the biblical myth correspond to the 
myth in Plato's Symposium. In developing similar ideas, but without 
referring to Plato and holding instead ro the Bible alone, these Chris- 
tian writers, beginning with Boehme, were driven to make sophisti- 
cal and unnatural speculations so as to provide some unity for themes 
of diverse origins which exist in the biblical myth in the state of a 
harmonized blend. In fact, Genesis, as opposed to Plato, spoke first 
of the original being created as a hermaphrodite and then described 
the appearance of the sexes not as the effect of sin but as the work of 
God, who became aware, as it were, of a fault in his seven days' work 
of creation. Finding that it was not good for Adam to be alone, God 
divided him and formed Eve out of him. Last, with the sexes already 
existing, Genesis spoke of Adam's sin 3 for which it could not, as we 
noted earlier, give a sexual reason since the commandment to 
multiply and the saying that man will form one single flesh with 
woman came in Genesis before the story of the disobedience and Fall 
of Adam* 

The theory of the hermaphrodite, however, had such an influence 
on some Christian mystics and writers that they passed by these 
obvious discrepancies and sought to make that theory equal in worth 
within the biblical framework. Boehme, who inaugurated ihis strand 
of thought, not only was aware of Hermetic speculation but had also 
adopted from alchemical Hermetism a part of its symbolic 
terminology (thus Boehme made Sulfur, Mercury, Niter, Water, 
Fire, Salt, and so forth into symbols of cosmic and spiritual powers). 
It is likely that he took the story of the hermaphrodite not from the 
secret Jewish theology of the Kabbala but from Hermetism, which 
already possessed it in the forms of the Rcbis through an independent 
tradition derived from the mysteries and Gnostic circles. 

Boehme's arrangement of rhe biblical myth was as follows. In the 
beginning, one hermaphroditic being was created and combined 
wilhin itself ihe male and female principles (called by Boehme ihe 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



211 



Hue of Fire and the Hue of Light), The slumber of Adam was not the 
state into which God put him when, of God's own will, he wished to 
take Eve from Adam, but was conceived as the symbol of the first 
Fall. In Boehme this slumber alludes to the state in which Adam 
found himself when he misused his freedom, sundered himself from 
the divine world, and "imagined" he was in the world of nature, thus 
degrading himself by allying himself with the earth. Some of those 
who continued the work of Boehme linked this slumber to the dizzi- 
ness that overcame Adam when he saw the animals copulating and 
longed to imitate them. The appearance of the sexes would therefore 
have been the outcome of this original Fall; but there should also 
have been a divine remedy, just as if God saw the state of privation 
and desire of the fallen being and gave him the woman Eve to avert a 
worse outcome. 80 Leo the Hebrew had already been teaching that the 
original purpose of man was not procreation but divine 
contemplation, which would have ensured everlasting life without 
rhe need to procreate > It was when man became mortal owing to his 
sin that God gave him the power to reproduce himself by providing 
Eve as his mate so that in one way or another mankind should not 
perish. 81 

Let us go back to Boehme: the story of the apple and the serpent 
(the true sin, according to the orthodox story) should not be referred 
to a second Fall or second phase of the Fall. J. J. Wirz, a follower of 
Boehme, recounted the birth of Eve in the following way: after 
having seen the animals copulating, Adam begat Eve first as a 
magical image (we might say, as a feverish image projected by his 
own desire), which he then endowed with earthly substance. Last, 
God intervened to breathe a divine spirit into her and gave her a true 
being, so that the two then made one. 82 

In such speculative thinking we find a typical double nature of the 
female principle in relation to the doctrine of Sophia or the wisdom of 
the divine Virgin. The undivided original being should have been 
united inwardly "in a holy and hidden blend" to the "dazzling body 
of the heavenly Sophia." Joined to her, Adam could communicate 
with God and perform all miracles. 8 ' Gichtel spoke of this Sophia as 
the "light of the fiery soul" in the original being; when he considered 
Sophia as the "fiat or sanction with which God created everything"' 
or as the "power" of God, he made her appear as almost the equiva- 
lent of the Hindu Shakti. She was also assimilated to the Tree of Life 
and called the Water of Life (M. Hahn), and here we find links with 
traditional symbols of the female, already known to us. 8 ^ Finally, 
Sophia was also ihonght of as "heavenly knowledge." Boehme and 
(?ichlcl also described ihe Fall in the following way: like Lucifer, ihe 
primordial being wished tit dominate ihe Virgin, who (hen sundered 



212 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



herself from him so that there remained in him only the fiery 
principle, dry and thirsty and devoid of light. Other writers (e.g., 
Gottfried Arnold) believed that it was carnal desire itself that caused 
the original being to lose his "hidden wife."* 6 However, even in the 
degraded state in which he loved women, it was, secretly, always that 
Virgin whom he desired; he always hungered for her even when he 
believed he was glutted with carnal and earthly pleasure. The "weak" 
earthly woman was only a substitute for her. The completion of being 
that she seemed to offer was an illusion. Boehme made the biblical 
exile from Eden with its Tree of Life into a symbol of the 
impossibility of reaching man's goal through the union of the earthly 
sexes; it was like touching a fruit that the gardener snatched at once 
from man's hand because man had replaced Sophia with Eve or had 
replaced the Virgin with the matrix Veneris , which had attracted him 
with false desire. 87 Wirz ss thought of the fire of the sword of the 
angel placed on guard at Eden as being that which should destroy, 
root and branch, the animal principle of desire in those who truly 
aspired to the reintegration of the divine image. From this we pass on 
next to the study of the doctrine of the Virgin Mary, in whom is 
fulfilled not only the birth of the Son but also the rebirth of the Soul. 
Thus, in this school of thought, which seeks a link to the Hebrew 
biblical myth supported by Christianity, the doctrine of the her- 
maphrodite is shown as the key to the mystery of the reciprocal at- 
traction of the sexes. Franz von Baader made the decisive pronounce- 
ment that "only the theology that indicates sin as the disintegration oi 
man and presents redemption and rebirth as this reintegration will 
rise victorious over all its foes." 89 Otherwise the doctrine of Sophia 
has led mainly to the dualism of a puritanical asceticism; he who 
wishes to reach Sophia again must renounce Eve, the earthly woman, 
for the one excludes the other. Sophia, moreover, is sometimes con- 
fused and identified with Mary and at other times with Christ (who, 
according to Scotus and these writers, should have renewed in him- 
self the unity of the two sexes); she is desired not only by man but also 
by woman, just as if she, Sophia, embodied the One. This leads to- 
ward the plane of mere religious mysticism. We do not know if these 
speculations led to the practice of actual evocations, except perhaps 
in the case of Gichtel (he was perhaps the exponent nearest to esoter- 
ism in the whole of this school, for we find in his writings, among 
other things, a doctrine of the secret centers of the body like that of 
yoga and Tantrism). 90 Gichtel wrote, "We have a starry body within 
the one composed of the elements, and that starry body is also 
spiritual and has a hunger for Sophia and continues to attract her 
with this hunger."' 1 Hut in general we can find nothing in this school 
linked lo ;i definite inilialorv use oi sex. Al the most we arrive :il 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



213 



an idealizing justification of wedlock instead of an ascetic denial of it. 

This justification is to be found, above all, in one of the later 
exponents of this school, Franz von Baader } who wrote, "The 
purpose of wedlock as a sacrament is the mutual restoration of the 
heavenly or angelical image in man as he should be, namely he who 
inwardly or spiritually is no longer a male animal, and also in woman 
as she should be, namely no longer a female animal, for it is only in 
this way that they both should have fulfilled in themselves the idea of 
mankind." 92 "It is only at this level," added Baader, 95 "that we can 
understand the sacramental element in such a union [marriage], for 
only such an end leads us beyond time into everlastingly true being, 
whereas that which is merely earthly or temporary cannot, as such, 
possess the character of a sacrament, nor does it need such a 
character." Therefore, "the higher meaning of sexual love, which 
should not be identified with the instinct for reproduction's nothing 
other than the need to help both man and woman to become 
integrated inwardly (in soul and in spirit) in the complete human or 
original divine image." 94 This hermaphroditic image, which became 
noncorporeal after the Fall, should be embodied, fixed, and 
established in two lovers so that "the two do not merely reproduce 
themselves in a third being or baby and so that, although they 
themselves remain what they are (unregenerated), yet they are both 
reborn inwardly as children of God." 95 

However, apart from this abstract sketch, Baader did not conceive 
of a real initiatory path for sex, even in theory, for he remained tied to 
Christian dualism and asexual mysticism. For instance, we find him 
propounding the strange and somewhat comical theory that a mere 
embrace of lovers that involves only the area of the breast should be 
contrasted to actual coitus, "which, taken by itself in the abstract, is 
so little an act of union and love (or marriage) that it expresses rather 
the opposite, the greatest mutual reinforcement of selfishness (or 
nonlove), which ends not in union but in indifference and in the sepa- 
ration of two despiritualizcd poles and indeed in the reciprocal loss of 
the one within the other and even in the torpidity which is the brother 
of death, for it is an animal act that can only be exorcised through em- 
bracing, that is, through love," 96 Baader linked this contrast to that 
existing between the mystical Christian doctrine of the androgyne 
and the "heathen" theory, which, according to him, concerned the 
hermaphrodite: 

In sexual relations taken by themselves or considered without the exor- 
cism carried mil by love- -hy religious love as the only principle of every 
five assot union which enhances the link imposed hy passion until a free 
union is accomplished wnionoi In id :ii all that which ihe thinkers and 
philosopher, tlraliitf. wiih 1 1n* uaiiire nl paganism siinpnsetl, namely an 



L 



214 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



urge to go back to the hermaphrodite, as if to the integration of human 
nature in man and woman; there is rather, physically and psychically, the 
same orgiastic, loveless, selfish impulse in both man and woman to 
arouse in themselves individually the double hermaphroditic desire and 
to take from each other what each of them needs for that arousal, so that 
in coitus without love the uttermost selfishness of both man and woman 
seeks its ow T n satisfaction, the woman acting here as an instrument for the 
man, and the man for the woman; and i herd ore the satisfaction of sexual 
instinct is fulfilled not only by disdain but even by hatred toward the 
other person. 97 

Anyone acquainted with the doctrine of the hermaphrodite and the 
metaphysics of sex in their proper context can readily see the confu- 
sion and one-sidedness of Baader*s opinions. Like the other writers 
cited earlier, he may have some understanding of the deepest cause of 
sexual attraction, but he still ends in a vague mysticism that always 
reflects the inborn Christian haired of sexual experience. Like so 
many theorists of love, Baadcr seems to understand very little of the 
real values of such experience. The forms in which this experience is 
reduced to the mutual greedy, sexual selfishness of lovers are the low- 
est even in mere profane love. We have already seen how in orgiastic 
experience, just as in all known experience of sexual union, the 
destructive factor, which involves a rupture of the individual ego 
(existential ly j the opposite of selfishness or Selhstsucht), is instead 
fundamental, while the reader already knows the deepest meaning of 
the hatred that Baader mentions. The mythical story in Baader, as in 
Boehme, is acceptable to the effect that, since the primordial being 
sundered itself from the Father, its "fiery quality" took up the form 
of a false being as the ego in manhood and that this form was extrinsic 
and degenerative and had to be overcome and slain and to disappear , 
But he said practically nothing 98 about the practice of a love able to 
restore the One as if through a mystery. In these writers the general 
picture does not differ too much from orthodox doctrine, which 
urges believers to repress sexuality as much as possible 
(understanding it as animal in nature). It confines sexuality to 
"chaste unions" of spouses who should, above all, love each other in 
God and in this way forget their sexual characteristics. The latest 
exponent of this Christianizing view, Berdyaev, conformed to 
Russian mentality in shifting the problem onto an escha to logical 
plane and relegating "the man with a transfigured sexuality" and the 
"revelation of heavenly hermaphroditism'' to a future world epoch. 99 
In conclusion we may say that, overall, this speculation adds 
nothing to Plato's development of the subject; indeed the opposite is 
the case. To begin with, the references to Christianity and the 
confused biblical mylh hinder us from extracting the principles of 



Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations 



215 



the real metaphysics of sex. Only these are able to give us a basis for 
the system of holy marriage and for the practices we shall deal with in 
the next chapter, which are based on the phenomena of 
transcendence that nonmystical but real sexual love can provoke. It is 
a fact that in Christianity the doctrine of the hermaphrodite 
represented an alien seed cast onto unsuitable ground in which it 
could not bear fruit. The ideas we have just summarized can, at most, 
help one who does not seek Sophia through Eve but tends to call 
upon her and be united with her at a mystical level, assisting himself 
with the forms to which the concept of the female archetype or 
"woman of God" has led in a certain school of Christianity that 
reflects Gnostic influences. 

In passing, it would be interesting to find the origin of the Mormon 
belief that a man, when dead, cannot reach the seventh and highest 
degree of holiness and become a divine being unless he has been 
married to a woman. 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



217 



6 

Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



Transmutations and the Commandment of Chastity 

Let us now briefly consider the fourth solution to the problem of sex- 
uality: the ascetic transmutation of the sex drive in relation to super- 
natural phenomena. 

In the great majority of ascetic and initiatory traditions we meet 
the commandment to be chaste and to abstain from dealings with 
woman. In general this commandment is not properly understood 
because a moralistic meaning is attached to it. It is mistakenly be- 
lieved that the exclusion or elimination of the sex drive is desirable 
("to make ourselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven," as 
Matthew said). Sexual drive lies at the very root of the living 
individual, and to believe one can truly suppress it is self-delusion. 
At best it can be repressed in its most direct manifestations, but this 
will only lead to the neurotic and divided existence on which modern 
psychoanalysis has cast so much light. The only alternatives in 
coping with the sexual drive are to assert it or to transform it. When 
transmutation is not possible, repression is inadvisable from a 
spiritual point of view, for it may lead to inner paralyzing contrasts, 
to dissipation of energy, and to perilous displacements. Sufficient 
examples of this exist in emotionally based Christian mysticism. 

It is to the second possibility, transmutation, that the ascetic or in- 
itiatory commandment of chastity or continence is really addressed. 
Here it is not a question of eliminating the sexual energy but of relin- 
quishing its use and dissipation in ordinary carnal and procreativc 
intercourse. Its potential is conserved, but it is separated from the 
plane of duality and applied at a different level. We have repeatedly 
considered what eros can provide on the dualistic plane in relations 
between man and woman besides mere lustful sensuality (and we 
shall refer shortly to further and more precise teachings on this 
subject). The mystery of transmutation is concerned with a different 
field of capabilities, techniques, and inner procedures. However, we 
must first get a clear idea of what we are dealing with, especially 
because ambiguities may arise from the widely held views of 
contemporary psychoanalysis. 

First, when esoteric doctrines speak of sex, they refer to the mani- 
festation of a deeper and more elementary force th:m thai which in 



k 



the teachings of Freud is called libido or the pleasure principle; they 
refer to a force having a potential metaphysical value, as we made 
clear in examining the myth of the hermaphrodite. 

There is another point that is no less important: the transmutation 
involved in the higher practice of asceticism must not be confused 
with the displacements and subliminations that psychoanalysis is oc- 
cupied with or the techniques that it employs to overcome personal 
sexual problems; for that is a matter not of real transmutation at the 
root level but of peripheral phenomenology on the edge of ordinary, 
profane life, concerned above all with pathological situations that 
hold no interest for us. When conscious yogic techniques are applied, 
transformation can take place, if the spirit of the practitioner pos- 
sesses a truly transcendental reference point capable of absorbing the 
whole of his being. This is the case in the higher practice of asceticism 
but not in the therapy of psychoanalysis. This condition is more than 
natural; if we acknowledge the deepest metaphysical meaning of 
eros, we shall readily understand that only in the former case can the 
diversion or revulsion of sexuality from its most immediate object not 
leave remains, for it will take place exactly in accordance with the 
deepest meaning. Instead, the transformation of the normal sexual 
force will happen by itself , without violent and specific occurrences, 
when the whole spirit is truly focused on something higher. This 
happened in the past to the saints, mystics, and ascetics of high rank 
who. after an initial period of self-control, had no reason at all to fight 
against the "flesh" and "the temptations of the flesh." This category 
of things merely ceased to interest them; they no longer felt the need 
for a woman because the integration of being in them took place in 
another, more direct and less perilous way. The most certain mark of 
this attainment was not a puritanical dislike of sex but merely 
indifference and tranquillity toward it. 

This is no concern of psychoanalysis; the purpose of such transfor- 
mation is not to "heal" a sexual neurotic struggling with his com- 
plexes, severe or mild. Instead, its purpose is the transcendence of 
the human state, real regeneration, and a change of ontological 
status. The transmuted force of sex should lead to this end. In such a 
context the ascetic, yogic, or initiatory commandment of chastity is 
justified in technical rather than "ethical" terms. The teachings of 
(he mysieries spoke of one single current with a double How, 
symbol i/cd by I he (heal Jordan and the ocean, which, flowing 
downward, leads to the gencmlioii ol men and. Mowing upward, In 
the ^encralion of j;ods.' This leaching makes evident I lie double 
eapaltilily inborn in I he lone ol sex, depending uy iis polari/.atiou. 
This is ihe Iwisis ol the praciicr, or myslci'v, <»1 hauMimlatiou, to 
which line lij'iire on Tiinil r:ird XIV i" Temperam e^M tiers, i )n ili:ii 



218 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



219 



card a woman with wings is pictured decanting liquid from a silver 
into a golden receptacle without spilling a drop, while some flowers 
can be seen sprouting from the ground nearby which symbolize inner 
and upward growth. 2 

Furthermore } the same expression, "upward flow" or urdhvaretas, 
recurs in the terminology of yoga. We shall come back to this shortly. 
In the meantime, it is worth distinguishing once again between the 
highest purpose just indicated and other incidental purposes some- 
times confused with the former in certain Hindu texts that treat the 
vow of brakmackarya or celibacy. The fact that sexual abuse can lead 
to nervous prostration and have a bad effect on the mental faculties, 
intelligence, and character is rather banal and well known and only of 
interest in relation to the personal psychic well-being of a normal 
man in common life. But the possible significance of sexual 
experience may cause many people to neglect such consequences, as 
pointed out in the discussion (in the appendix to chapter 2) of the 
values of erotic transcendence in the profane sphere. Besides such 
misuse , a possible depressive effect resulting from the practice of 
sexuality depends to a great extent on the system of coitus used, as we 
also saw. Finally, the more specific decision not to waste vital, 
nervous energy but to save it by restricting one's sexual life is, from a 
spiritual point of view, of little interest unless one has in mind a 
higher use for that energy. 

We are now ready to take up the theory of ojas and ojas-shakii. We 
can see the point in question even in a modern writer like Sivananda 
Sarasvati, although his considerations are often intcrsticcd with mat- 
ters of health and ethics. He wrote, "The seed is dynamic energy 
which has to be converted into spiritual energy" (ojas), and added, 
"He who seeks divine realization with true zeal should observe strict 
chastity*" 3 Here we must make a distinction. On the one hand, what 
Sivananda said concerns a force that springs from all self-control and 
from all active inhibition. Thai law is in action which creates that 
most subtle and efficacious power of seduction exercised by the 
"chaste" type of woman. It is, therefore, not a question of sexuality 
alone. Sivananda acknowledged that "even wrath and muscular force 
can be transformed into ojas." 4 It is an ancient esoteric teaching that 
the mastery of every impulse of a given strength, even if merely 
physical, frees a higher and more subtle energy; therefore, the same 
must be the case with sexual impulse and desire. As an outcome of 
the buildup of ojas in this way, there is contemplated, among other 
things, the formation of a special "magnetic aura" in a "personality 
that inspires a kind of holy awe," together with the power of 
influencing other people by words or a mere look. The same energy, 
ojas or ojas-sJuikti, can also be employed for contemplation and 
spiritual rcali/atioiu H 



II 



In this connection we may add that the chastity which warriors 
undertook in various traditions, often among savage peoples, too, 
can be linked to this complex of ideas. It was a question less of saving 
physical energy than of accumulating a force that w r as to some extent 
supernatural and magical, in the same sense of qjas, for integration of 
the natural forces of the warrior. Such a context is explicit, for 
instance, in a well-known episode in the Mahabharata. 

We must now distinguish between the generic notion of ojas as a 
subtle force, which can even be produced by controlling elementary 
impulses other than sex, and virya, or spiritual manhood, which if 
lost or wasted results in death and if withheld and conserved leads to 
lite. Virya, as we said earlier, is linked to the seed, to such an extent 
that in the technical and mystical terminology of Hindu texts the 
word is often used to designate both. In this context we can under- 
stand the concept of the "aspirating death that comes from woman." 
From metaphysical and ascetic viewpoints, that which is wasted in 
animalistic and lustful unions is not mere vital or nervous energy but 
rather the "being" principle of man, his transcendental manhood. It 
was in this connection that wc recognized a higher form of manhood 
in the ascetic. This background is consistent with the specific doc- 
trine of transmutation and the upward flow of force, which flows 
downward in merely natural sex; this transmutation comes through 
practicing chastity and then making this force change its polarity. 
Now we can see why the commandment to practice chastity is also 
found in operational magic, Eliphas Levi rightly said that for a 
"wizard," nothing is more deadly than the desire for sensual 
pleasure. Here the purely technical and nonmoral end purpose of the 
commandment to practice continence seems quite clear. The force 
gained through active inhibition and transmutation of sex in terms of 
transcendental manhood can also be used for "wicked" purposes. 
The commandment of chastity may be equally strict in operations of 
"white" or "black" magic. 

The Techniques of Endogenous Transmutation in Kutidalini-Yoga and 
Taoism 

A distinction like the one we have just made is also necessary in the 
sphere of yoga itself. In contrast to asceticism and mysticism, yoga is 
an exact science of techniques for controlling processes in the service 
of specific ends. Yoga is in essence, however, a secret doctrine for 
which the principle of direct transmission is the rule; and so, al- 
though a great deal has been published about it find many classical 
lexis have been translated in ihc Wcsl in recent years, it is not always 
easy loj'lcan :in adequate mulerstaintinj 1 , ol some hmclamcnfal paints 
o| its te:u hinj'v 



220 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



221 



Yoga, especially in its Tibetan adaptation, seems to have envisaged 
and taught a transformation of sexual force in the generic sense of 
ojas. This is certainly at issue when tum-mo or "mystical heat" is 
spoken of as an energy that can also produce extranormal phenomena 
of a physical and physiological nature. 6 In the same way, when this 
heat is assigned rhe function of arousing the kundalini, it is obviously 
only an aid or an instrument. But it is better to refer to the actual 
Hindu teachings of Tannic kundalini yoga, where a clearer doctrinal 
picture of the whole can be found. 

The field of yoga in Tan tr ism is separate from that of the sexual 
practices we shall detail later on, in the sense of two paths that may 
lead to the same goal but are applicable to men of different gifts and 
viewpoints in their most profound nature. 

Whether the path of yoga that excludes woman is recommended, 
or instead the one that includes her, will depend on the predomi- 
nance of sattva (the luminous principle of "being") or rajas (the prin- 
ciple of excitability, transport, and fire or passion in the individual 
aspirant). The two human types based on these principles are also 
called the spiritual (divine or divya) type and the heroic (viryd) type 
respectively; both of them equally tread the path of Shiva and are dis- 
tinguished from the person who restricts himself to the ritualistic 
practice of traditional religion. 

The spirit of Tantric yoga itself is characterized best by these 
words from a text: "What need have I of an external woman? I have a 
woman within me." 7 This alludes to the female principle contained 
in the depths of a man's being which corresponds to "our Diana," to 
"Eve," and to "secret Hebe" of Western Hermetism. According to 
Tantrisrn, this Goddess is present in the human organism itself in the 
form of an elementary force which is given the name of "she who is 
wrapped" (this is the meaning of the word kundalini). This yoga, 
therefore, considers an inner process; the union of male with female 
and the surmounting thereby of the Dyad are carried out in one's 
own body without recourse to another individual of the opposite sex 
as an embodiment and living symbol of the opposite principle. 
Hyperphysical physiology now comes into play with its subtle forces 
and elements acting behind the material structure of the organism 
and below the threshold of normal waking consciousness. Two 
streams of vital energy, called id a and pingala, which normally run in 
coils on both sides of the backbone, one linked to the negative, 
female, lunar principle and the other to the positive, male, solar 
principle, play an important role. They are manifestations and 
analogues of the Dyad or elementary polarity in the human body. A 
yogi can divert these streams by certain strenuous techniques, 
preventing ihcni from following llieir iwo lateral, winding directions 



k. 



and making them flow together. This diversion and union bring 
about a closure of circuit that can lead to the awakening of the 

kundalini. 

We said that the kundalini represents the Goddess or primordial 
Shakti within man for the followers of Tantrisrn. It is the "dazzling" 
life force which has organized the body and continues to dwell there 
secretly as the root of all the subtle, vital currents in the body. It is 
called "she who is wrapped" to indicate that in ordinary human exist- 
ence its true nature is invisible; it "sleeps" in a subtle center located at 
the base of the spine. There is an essential relationship between the 
expression of thoughts, the fire of desire, and the sexual functions. * 
As the potential bride of the primordial male, the kundalini is ex- 
pressed by the symbolism of a serpent wound around the lingam or 
phallus of Shiva in the lowest center. When the streams on the two 
sides are halted, the kundalini awakens and "unwinds" itself. A 
change of polarity in the basic life force of man then occurs, and the 
kundalini Hows upward, running along an axial "duct" up the line of 
the backbone, called the sushumna (it is also called the "path of 
Shakti" and, in Buddhist Tantrisrn, "the path of nirvana"). From its 
original seat in the profane, the kundalini goes upward to the top of 
the head . A fiery nature is attributed by analogy to the aroused force, 
and therefore some texts describe its arousal and ascent in terms of a 
fire that burns everything it meets and eliminates all conditional 
qualities. In this respect we may speak of the sushumna as the 
dazzling path of unity inasmuch as the ascent occurs under the sign of 
an advancing union of the male and female, the union being made 
perfect and absolute at the end of the path of the sushumna at the top 
of the head. Here there is the excesstts; Shiva and Shakti, the god and 
goddess embrace and are united; there is complete fusion and 
resolution of the shakti principle in the shiva principle, equivalent to 
the Great Liberation, the transcendental reintegration, the 
surmounting of the dual state and, in general, of the cosmic bond. 

References to the organism in this should not make us think of pro- 
cesses that are exhausted within the individual physical structure. 
The body in Tantrisrn is "made cosmic" and is conceived of in terms 
of principles and powers that also act in the world and in nature in ac- 
cordance with the traditional correspondence between macrocosm 
and microcosm. Thus the ascent of the kundalini in a yogi involves a 
set of supersensual experiences and a passage through the "elements" 
(as in the ancient mysteries) and also through manifold states of being 
symbolized in various ways according to different schools and, in this 
particular yoga, linked to various centers arranged along the axial 
path and awakened by the kundalini ;is il contacts llicm. 

hi I his tvpc ol yuj'.a, 1 Ik- key to the whole process is I lie arousal ol 



222 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



223 



the basic energy, which also continues to be the operational power 
until the final resolution. Speaking of the relationship that this force 
has to the sex urge and animal generation in a normal man, a text 
states that this force, the kundalini, produces slavery in the ignorant 
and freedom in the yogi. 10 There is obviously a twofold polarity. 
From the change in polarity arises the mystery of transmutation and 
awakening. The texts speak openly of a saving of the force of the 
seed, the virya, of the "backward practice" (ujana-sadkand) and of 
the ''causing of an upward flow" (urdhvaretas). 11 The operation of 
''causing the seed to flow upward" was mentioned in the Upanishads 
(cf. Maitri-Upanishad VI, 33: Mahanarayani-Upanishad XII, I) as 
well as in hatha yoga in general. In the Dhyana-bindu-Upanishad 
(86), we read, "He in whose body the seed remains need not fear 
death," and in the "Chandilya-Upanishad" it is written, "Either we 
succeed in overcoming the bindu or the Yoga fails," Hindu being one 
of the words lo describe the force of the seed or the virya. According 
to Tannic teachings and symbolism, as long as the kundalini sleeps, 
it stops access to the central path of $u$humna> which is the same as 
saying that the force oriented to normal sexuality forms an obstacle 
for the process that should lead to initiatory rebirth instead of animal 
generation. In this way, the sleeping kundalini is also represented as 
blocking the opening of Shiva's phallus, so that the seed of rebirth on 
high cannot be emitted. On the other hand, it is said that when vital 
energy no longer runs along the two lines on the sides, as happens in 
the ordinary existence of a normal man, but, with the obstruction 
removed , enters the central duct or suskumna, the conditional quality 
of the time is suspended and "the fire of death blazes"; that is, a 
rupture of level takes place equivalent to the crisis that in many 
traditions is generally called "initiatory death." "You who ascend 
like a streak of lightning," says a hymn of the Goddess, who is 
manifested in this. 12 Therefore, it is natural that the practices in 
question should not be free from grave perils; the texts say that he 
who awakens the kundalini without the necessary skill and the 
knowledge of a true yogi may meet not only serious disturbances but 
even madness and death (actual death, not initiatory death). 
Therefore, the strictest disciplines of self-control, mental 
concentration, and purification are the indispensable precondition 
lor kundalini yoga. Only a man who has realized in himself his true 
nature as Shiva is capable of not being overthrown when he arouses, 
exposes, and activates the Goddess. One text, in fact, gives the 
symbolism of a widow (who represents the force in its state of 
separation from the One during the descending phase, bereft of its 
counterpart, the male principle) seated by two rivers, which 
represent the (wo streams (ida and pingala, which in the human 



L 



framework reflect the principle of the Dyad), violently stripped and 
possessed, the text tells us. She will then lead to the highest seat. 13 

Kundalini yoga extensively uses a technique of breathing linked to 
special magical positions of the body {asana). A system of breathing, 
which includes the total cessation of breathing, facilitates the desired 
diversion of the subtle energies. 

Given the scope of this book, we must limit out discussion of kun- 
dalini yoga to this brief sketch and direct our readers for further in- 
formation to the book of ours cited earlier. We have referred to this 
yoga as an outstanding and well-attested example of the 
"endogenous" method that has rigorous chastity as a prerequisite. It 
arouses the force that woman bears and embodies in the conditioned 
world, that is, the Shakti, in the form of the kundalini; in the same 
way, within a yogi the magical coitus and marriage to the divinity are 
realized after preliminary ascetic discipline has led him to realize the 
opposite principle, the principle of the absolute or transcendental 
male, the Shiva nature or the Vajradhara (Bearer of the Scepter), 
according to the Tibetan name. 

The mystery of transmutation is found in other secret traditions as 
well. Taoism knows of it, and the alchemy of both the East and West 
often alludes to its techniques, as well as to the problematical 
transmutation of metallic substances, by means of a symbolic jargon. 
Precisely because of the potential poly valence belonging to all 
esoteric symbolism, the outline of the fundamental operations in 
alchemical hermetism can admit an interpretation in terms of sexual 
techniques as well. However, such an interpretation is not the only 
one, nor is it a binding one; indeed, with the possible exception of 
Nicola Flamel, no information has come down to us from the golden 
period of this tradition concerning teachers who worked on this plane 
with the assistance of women. Later we shall refer to that 
interpretation only from a secondary point of view by considering 
some evidence in modern writers who have made use of hermetic 
symbolism in relation to these realizations. The interpretation of the 
opus traitsformationis in merely initiatory terms instead falls outside 
our subject; however, we treated it in full in another book. 14 

As regards the operational Taoism of the Far East, it is necessary to 
make the same distinction as in the case of Tantrisrn, for here, too, a 
kind of endogenous transmutation of the yoga type is contrasted with 
a category of explicitly sexual practices; we shall come back to the 
kilter shortly. As regards the former, there are not always explicit 
references to sexuality as the raw material lor the transmutation. We 
shall therefore restrict ourselves to a brief note on the basis of the 
teachings contained in ;i nil her late text, the Tai I Ckin Itita Tsung 
( 7«A, which has htvn Irsiiiskilwl in some laimpean laii^u;ij. , ,esas"'l'lie 



224 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Secret of the Golden Flower," 15 by reason of some interesting 
likenesses between it and kundalini yoga. 

This Taoist text also Starrs with the primordial duality, of tiu&yang 
andym, which is present in each individual and not in two separate 
persons of opposite sexes. In man ihtyang or male principle is pres- 
ent in the form of the luminous htm element situated in the head and 
precisely between the two eyes. The yin or female principle is 
present, instead, in the form of the obscure p'o element located in the 
lower part of the body in an area called the "space of the force," and 
this brings us back again to the idea of the female as Shakti. In 
Chinese teachings the duality is also indicated as that of the fising and 
ming y words meaning "being" and "life," which refer to one of the 
most essential aspects of the Great Dyad. It is said that with the birth 
of individual existence, "being and life are separated and see each 
other no more from that moment onward," naturally, wherever the 
initiatory procedures described in the text do not take place, 
procedures which have the purpose of leading the center of the 
human being back to the Great Pole {fat chi) or "Great One" or 
"State without Duality" {wit chi), which takes back to itself both the 
being and life, the.y<zw£and thcyin. 

The condition of an ordinary man is that of a being in whom "the 
center is no longer defended" and where the female yin principle (also 
called the "lower soul") subjects the male yang principle (also called 
the "higher soul"), compelling it to serve her and directing it out- 
ward. This outward direction is called "straight and irreversible" 
(like someone who is thrust irresistibly forward) and involves the dis- 
persion and dissipation of vital energy and of the "original seed." The 
starting point for reintegration, therefore, is an action intended to 
turn energy back upon itself and "to make the light circulate" (or 
crystallize), and for this purpose systems of spiritual concentration 
are required (the so-called fixed contemplation or chikkuan) together 
with breathing exercises, as in yoga. When the change of direction 
has been brought about, the straight outward compulsion is stopped 
and replaced with a backward movement and thereafter with a move- 
ment of "rotation"; then other systems tend to make the conscious- 
ness descend to [he "space of the force/' At this point (he rupture of 
level and the union of the two opposed principles take place, with the 
final meaning, however, of a "distillation of the yin in pure yang" To 
the restoration of the original state "without duality," which is also 
called the "sprouting of the Flower of Gold," is linked the birth of the 
kuei, a word that can be translated as "active divine being." Observe 
that the Chinese character kuei also means lightning; we noted earlier 
the relationship established in other traditions between the mystery 
of reintegration, the number I luce, and lightning. 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



225 



L' 



Taking possession of the "original seed" and withholding it are a 
central theme in such teachings. But in this text only a few scanty al- 
lusions can lead us to believe that this seed is the equivalent of the 
Hindu virya and therefore has a specific reference to the secret force 
of manhood, which is normally received by a woman when the male 
seed runs onto her innermost flesh in the act of love. At one point the 
fundamental principle of sexual magic is actually expressed, namely 
the principle of the transmutation, into a beneficial thing, of that 
which in itself should have a toxic character when it is said, "Here 
we allude to the sexual union of man with woman from which sons 
and daughters are born. The madman squanders the most precious 
jewel of his body in unbridled pleasures and knows not how to save 
his seminal energy, with the exhaustion of which the body collapses. 
Those who are learned have no way of conserving their life other than 
by eliminating pleasure and conserving their seed." 16 Here the end 
purpose is the prolongation of existence symbolized in the alchemic 
elixirs of long life (a recurring theme in Taoism also), rather than the 
initiatory reintegration of the being. In relating the alleged use of 
women to obtain the elixir by P'cng, an ancient teacher, the text 
states that this did not involve actual sexual copulation but the union 
and sublimation of the two principles, that of the crystallized light, 
yang> and that of the wet force, yin. Therefore, these teachings refer 
to the plane of endogenous processes, on which the mystery of trans- 
mutation is fulfilled directly within a single being ("in one single ves- 
sel," to use the expression of hermetism) and not in operations to be 
conducted in copulation with a woman ("operation with two 
vessels"). We shall write shortly about more ancient Taoist texts 
wherein this second possibility is, instead, considered openly; in 
their case, however, the doctrinal assumptions are not different from 
those just indicated in referring to the teachings of the Secret of the 
Golden Flower. 

Sex in the Kahhala and Eleusinian Mysteries 

We still must examine the tech niques used to bring about an ecstatic, 
mystical or initiatory rupture of level through special methods of 
sexual union. Moreover, we shall comment briefly on some possible 
applications of "operational" magic. 

This sphere is different from that of sacred ceremonies and ritual 
unions in that it places greater emphasis on pure experience than on 
the realization of symbols and cosmic analogies. It is not that the one 
excludes the other; indeed, we sfeall see that the practice of evoca- 
tions and transmutations often constitutes a strict premise for these 
experiential itvli unfiles. In essence, however, l he purpose is 
differed!. Il isnol emu rnied Willi holy eeremoiiics and pail ieipal ions 



226 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



227 



that can be carried out within the framework of institutions and 
cults, but is an absolute fact of individual experience that can 
eliminate the conditional qualities of the ego. Here everything is 
directly considered, assumed, aroused, and strengthened which, as a 
phenomenon of partial or amative transcendence, we have already 
seen to be present in profane sexual love itself. As a source of 
information, what has leaked out from the secret traditions of various 
civilizations can be supplemented with the more serious and 
trustworthy contents of some writings referring to circles in which 
knowledge and practices of the same kind seem to have continued up 
to our own times. 

As an introduction we shall mention the ideas that in Jewish eso- 
terism and, above all, in Hasidism lead us into this sphere. In the 
Zohar (I, 55b) we read, "The Holy One, may He be blessed, does not 
choose to dwell where the male and female are not united." A saying 
in the Talmud is "Three things have in themselves something of the 
beyond; the sun, the Sabbath, and sexual union." 17 Again, we find in 
the Zohar (III, 81a): 

The King [God J seeks only that which corresponds to him. Therefore the 
Holy One, may He be blessed, dwells in him who (like Him) is one. 
When man, in perfect holiness, realizes the One, He is in that one. And 
when is it that man is called one? When man and woman are joined to- 
gether sexually. . . . Come and seel At the point at which a human being 
as male and female is united, taking care that his thoughts are holy, he is 
perfect and stainless and is called one, Man should therefore act so that 
woman is glad at that moment and has one single wish together with him, 
and both of them united should bring their mind to that thing. For thus 
has it been taught, "He who has not taken a woman is as if he were only a 
half (Jebamoth, 83). If, however, man and woman are united and be- 
come one, body and soul, then the human being is called one, and the 
Holy One, may He be blessed, takes up his dwelling in this one and 
generates for him a holy spirit." 1 

Beginning with these views, in which occur again the theme of the 
hermaphrodite. «-c find that practices of sexual magic were not 
foreign to certain trends of Kabbalism. We should consider as an 
appearance of one of these practices the information that has come 
down to us regarding the sect of the Sabbatians with regard also to the 
doctrines set forth by Jakob Franck. The "advent of the Messiah" is 
here given an esoteric interpretation and is considered not as a 
historical or collective fact but as a symbol of inner individual 
awakening and of the enlightenment that frees men and leads them 
beyond the Law, To this is linked the specifically sexual theme 
whereby the mystical force of the Messiah is situated in woman, mid 
It is staled thai the mystery of the awakening and salvation is fulfilled 



L' 



through sexual union w T ith woman. In fact, Franck said, "I tell you 
that all the Hebrews are in great ill luck because they are waiting for 
the coming of the Savior and not for that of the Woman." By altering 
the doctrine of the Shekhinah somewhat, we find that this Woman or 
Virgin is in the end the female archetype, the Woman present in 
every woman and behind every woman, for it is said, "She has in her 
power many young women, all of whom receive their force from her ? 
so that, when she leaves them, they have no more power." In 
Franck's opinion she "is a door of God, through which one enters 
into God," and he added, "If you were worthy to take this Virgin, in 
whom all the force of the world dwells, you would also be able to 
fulfill the Work, but you are not worthy to take her." Here "Work" 
means the celebration of an orgiastic sexual mystery, of which it is 
said, "By means of this Work we draw nearer to the thing which is all 
naked and without covering, and therefore we ought to be able to 
fulfill it.'* It may be possible to see in this a likeness to the "sight of 
naked Diana" of which we spoke earlier; however, from the grace 
lavishly bestowed by this Virgi of the Kabbala, diverse powers and 
revelations can spring depending on the "rank" of each person. 19 
Ideas of this kind ought to be linked to an original initiatory 
teaching, 20 Their widespread dispersion ended, however, in misuses 
and deviations, as indeed was the case with Sabbatism where, among 
other things, the doctrine of the "messianic mystery of the 
awakening" and of the realization of the One seems to have led to 
orgies with mystical purposes centering on a naked girl worshipped 
with various deviant forms of sexuality. Such orgies have been 
rightly seen as a twisted revival of ancient cults of the Goddess, such 
as those of Ishtar. Just as among the Tantric Kaulas and among the 
Brothers of the Free Spirit of the Middle Ages, so also among these 
Jewish sects which made use of woman and sex there recurs the 
theme of the impeccability of the Awakened One, referring to a 
Kabbalistic doctrine regarding that principle in the human being 
which cannot be punished, whatever it does, for if it were punished, 
"it would be as if God punished himself." 

In the mysteries at Eleusis of classical antiquity, holy union had 
not only the generic value of ritual and symbolic holy matrimony, but 
also alluded to the mystery of rebirth within a context that originally 
must have included sexuality as a means; here, too, emphasis was on 
I he female principle, the divine woman* The purport of the evidence 
ol some Christian writers in this respect cannot be attributed to dero- 
gatory intentions and puritanical scandalmongering alone. Clement 
of Alexandria, Theodorel , and Pscflus agree in declaring that in those 
m ys l cries t he female or^am called tnysl ieally and euphemistically l he 
"woman's eomh," w:i:. shown in ilicj'a/r ol I lit- iniliales as if In nidi 



228 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



229 



cate the instrument needed to activate the mystery. Gregory Nazian- 
zienus, when referring to Demeter as the goddess of these mysteries, 
said he was ashamed to "expose to the light of day the nighttime 
ceremonies of the initiation and to make a mystery of the 
obscenities." He also included a verse in which Demeter was 
described as anasuramete (that is, she who shows her sex by lifting up 
her clothes) so that "she might initiate her lovers to those rites which 
are still celebrated symbolically even nowadays." 21 All this would 
leave us to suppose that the meaning of the symbolic ceremony of the 
mysteries, the ceremony alone having remained in evidence at later 
times, was to recall, behind the ritual holy matrimony itself and the 
sexual union of the priest and priestess (which was only simulated 
later on,) the mystery of the resurrection which can be brought about 
through sex and woman, the latter being considered the embodiment 
of the Goddess. Thus, at Eleusis, after the rite of the wedding had 
been fulfilled in darkness, a great light was lit and the high priest 
announced in a voice of thunder, "The Great Goddess has given birth 
to the holy Son; the Strong has generated the Strong"; and the ear of 
corn shown at this point to the onlookers as a symbol of the holy 
initiatory rebirth is strictly related to the primordial hermaphroditic 
man and to his resurrection. 22 And then it was said, "August indeed 
is spiritual, heavenly generation from on high, and strong is he who 
has been generated in this guise." It is possible, therefore, that under 
the sign of the mystery of the Great Goddess the ancient world of the 
Mediterranean also knew the secret doctrine of sexual initiation. 
What we know about the Eleusinian mysteries may only be a 
displacement of that doctrine onto the spiritual plane by a cult that no 
longer actually performed sex but employed other initiatory and 
mystery techniques. Little by little, these were reduced until these 
mysteries were a religious cult open to almost everybody. 

For specific information about the sexual techniques it is necessary 
to refer to the Orient and, first, to Tantrism in the Way of the Left 
Hand and the "secret ritual." As we mentioned, this ritual is 
restricted to those whose qualiiication is "manly" or "heroic" (virya) 
and who are dvandvatha or capable of overlooking all dualities, good 
and bad, merit and guilt, and other similar opposites in human 
values. 

Tantric Sexual Practices 

We said in the Introduction to this book that the practice and 
philosophy of Tantra is set within a specific historical context. It 
starts with the concept of an increasing involution through (our 
successive eras in the present cycle of mankind, and it maintains thai 
we have now reached the last of these eras, the so-called dark age or 



1 



Kali Yuga, which is a period of dissolution, of the prevalence of 
elementary forces, and of a Shakti no longer restrained within 
bounds, whereas the spirituality of mankind's origins has been 
almost wholly lost. According to Tantra, the path most suitable for 
such circumstances is one characterized in the directive "Ride the 
tiger." In other words, rather than avoid or directly oppose a 
dangerous force, one should grasp it and hold it tight with the idea of 
getting the better of it in the end. The arrival of the Kali Yuga 
effectively cancels the bond which in other times imposed secrecy 
regarding the doctrines and practices of the Way of the Left Hand 
because of their perilous nature and their potential for misuse, 
deviation, and distortion. 23 The fundamental principle of the secret 
teaching, which is common to both the Hindu and the Buddhist 
circles of the Tantras (the latter circle corresponds essentially to the 
Vajrayana) is the transformation of poison into medicine or "nectar," 
the use, for the purposes of freedom, of the very forces that have led 
or can lead to man's fall and perdition. "Poison as an antidote for 
poison" is a frequent maxim. Another Tantric principle is that 
"fruition" and "freedom" (or release, renunciation) do not 
necessarily exclude each other, as the one-sided ascetic schools 
believe. Their purpose is to realize both, to nourish passion and 
desire while at the same time remaining free. Teachings of this kind 
had earlier been deemed unsuitable for general publication. One text 
states that this path is as difficult "as walking on the edge of a sword 
or keeping a tiger on a rein." 24 In view of this difficulty, we may 
indeed wonder how well the Tantric methods are suited to today 
when the vast majority is wholly lacking in the training needed to face 
such risks. Anyone who thinks that Tantrism provides a convenient 
spiritual alibi for sensual abandonment is sorely mistaken. These 
teachings presuppose a preliminary initiation and consecration, an 
introduction to a community or chain (hula) that can provide 
protective force and a special course of asceticism and self -discipline. 
Furthermore, the same premise was in force in other teachings that 
proclaimed anomy and the freeing of the spirit from all bounds, 
rules, and mores of the times. Such was the case with the Ishmaelites 
of the period of the Sheikh of the Mountain, the Brothers of the Free 
Spirit, the Beghards, and the Ortlibians, of whom it was written, 
"Before reaching the point where all pleasure was allowed to them, 
they underwent very hard trials; their life was that of the strictest 
orders; ihcy aspired to break their own will and eliminate their own 
person so as to find if again as pure glory in divine 
splendor. . . . II lev I i:ul lo pray ^meditate* and exercise themselves 
in i he deeds ilia I disj-nM n > must. Km lis soon us ihev had reached the 
freedom of the spun , rvrrvilliiift was permitted." * 



230 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Tantrism Is rooted in the archaic substrate of aboriginal India, to 
which belongs the central theme of goddesses of the Shakti type as 
well as an assemblage of orgiastic practices and cults. Shadowy forms 
of Tantrism are found in rites bordering on witchcraft, whereby, to 
obtain special powers, man sought certain elementary female enti* 
tks> yakskini t yogini> dakmi, sometimes considered the servants of 
the goddess Durga and at other times her emanations. The Tantrist 
often interpolated animistic themes and used spells on those entities 
to subjugate them by incantations in the person of an actual woman, 
intoxicating himself and possessing that woman carnally in wild 
places, in a graveyard or wood. 26 However uncouth, these practices 
represent the use of evocations, which we examined in their manifold 
varieties in the preceding chapter, with the difference that in this case 
the sexual act really look place. The young woman who had first to be 
"demonized" and then violated not only constitutes the basis of the 
shadowy rites just mentioned but is also the fundamental theme of 
the higher forms of Tantric and Vajrayanic sexual magic. 

In these forms, moreover, the concept of the human couple, trans- 
formed into a momentary embodiment of the everlasting divine 
couple, moves from the generic ritual plane of holy marriage to the 
operational plane. The ontological principles of Shiva and Shakti or 
of other equivalent deities present in the bodies of the man and 
woman are realized; it is necessary to arrive ritually and 
sacramentally at a state where the man actually feels himself to be 
Shiva and the young woman Shakti. This is the precondition of a 
sexual union that must transcend the limitations of physical and 
carnal nature and assume a magical character. Its center of gravity 
must be transferred to a subtle plane where the mutual magnetisim of 
intense sexual love and desire consists in an "intoxication or 
congestion of astral light." Its "climax" and supreme ecstasy 
correspond to the rupture of level of individual consciousness and the 
sudden realization of the nondual state, 27 This is the ultimate goal of 
that parh of desire or kama-marga which has been considered in 
Hindu tradition alongside the other paths of liberation — the path of 
knowledge, the path of action, and so on. 

Let us investigate these various sides of Tantric practice more 
closely. 78 The starting point is the capacity for a particular feeling or 
perception of female nature, related to what we said earlier about the 
nakedness of woman. According to these teachings every woman em- 
bodies Shakti or Prakriti; therefore, a naked woman ritually ex- 
presses this same force in its pure, elementary, and primary stai e, noi 
bound to form and not hidden by an individual condition. When a 
woman removes all her clothing, she is offering this essential stale to 
the gaze of the onlookers. Therefore, Lliade was right when he 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



231 



L 



wrote, "The ritual nakedness of the yogini or companion of the vim 
has an intrinsic mystical value; if in the presence of a naked woman 
we do not feel arising in our deepest being the same awesome sensa- 
tion which we feel before the relevation of the cosmic Mystery, then 
there is no rite [in the union with her]; there is only a profane act with 
all the unfavorable consequences that ilow r therefrom; for instead of 
loosening the chain which binds us to our conditioned existence, the 
use of woman will strengthen that chain." 29 This subjective condi- 
tion (linked to a practice of intense visualization and of mental pro- 
jection of a vitalized cult image into the woman) acts as a counterpart 
to a procedure technically termed aropa, which is in its own way 
objective. Aropa means "establishment of a different quality" or, in 
a strict sense, "t ran substantiation" in the same accepted meaning of 
the word employed in Christianity for the mystery of the Eucharist 
where the priest invokes the actual presence of Christ. In this respect 
the Hindu writer we cited said that by means of aropa the physical 
form (ntpd) of the woman is not denied, but every atom of it is 
pervaded by the svarupa or primordial, nonphysical element that 
ontologically constitutes its essence. 30 To be qualified for the sexual 
practice, a young woman must be duly initiated and trained in the art 
of the magical positions (mudra). Her body is aroused and made 
living by nyasa* 1 a sacramental procedure by which a "divine fluid" 
is laid upon, emitted into, or aroused in various points of the body (in 
her "points of life"). This is an equivalent of the "demonization" of 
the woman belonging to the shadowy practices mentioned earlier, 
intended to strengthen the natural fluid that feeds the sexual 
magnetism of a normal woman and is the basis of her fascination. 
Besides, one name of the young women used in these rites is mudra. 
This has left the Orientalists perplexed, although it is clear enough; 
mudra (meaning, literally, a seal) is the name of the magical and ritual 
gestures or postures taken up by the yogis to activate the circuit or 
cause the closure of the circuit of certain currents of subtle force in 
the organism. This same part is played to a high degree by woman in 
magical coitus, and therefore the same name is transferred to her 
(perhaps in relation also to the real meaning of mudra, the special 
positions used by her during the act of love). 

At this level the young woman used in these practices is differen- 
tiated from the women in the mere promiscuous orgiastic rites, just 
as the system of coitus is different in the two cases. Just as the 
Worshippers of Love spoke of the "woman of the miracle," here the 
term used is "woman of exception" or vishesha mti y coming from the 
siunc suhslancc as the transcendent or divine woman, Radha, Durga, 
QiutuUili, Doiiihi, Sahsijn Sui-dari, tie, (she is sometimes identified 
wiih the kiuitl;iliin iImII in llir personified form of n goddess), h is 



232 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



said that it is with her and not with a common woman or samanya ran 
that coitus can attain to what certain schools call the sahaja or 
nondual primordial state that produces freedom even in life. 32 
However, it would be a mistake to think this entailed a vague 
idealization of the woman. In circles of this kind, dissolute girls of a 
low casie are sometimes exalted and indicated as the most suitable, 
even if a symbolic justification is adopted for the purpose; for by 
living outside social and ethical systems and the rules of the 
prevailing religion these young girls reflect in some way the state of a 
"raw material" not tied to a form. 33 This constitutes a specific 
difference with the wedding rite and unions of a holy rather than 
magical nature against a background of institutions and castes, of 
which we spoke earlier. Moreover, the special concept of virginity 
explained earlier returns when the girls used in the Kaula cult (a 
subdivision of the Tantric cult) are called the "virgin whores" or 
veshya kwnarika. The followers of Vishnu, according to Tantric 
practices, deem the highest kind of love to be the parakiya or 
unlawful love, referring to union with a very young girl or with a 
woman who is not one's own wife (or, to be more accurate, who is not 
one of one's own women, seeing that polygamy is lawful in this 
civilization). In rhetorical debates carried on in Bengal, just as in the 
Western medieval courts of love, the supporters of conjugal unions 
have always been defeated by those of free unions (also called 
marriages of Shiva) or unlawful unions; and therefore a couple who 
are unlawful and adulterous, such as Radha and Krishna, have been 
often upheld as a divine model which a human pair should emulate 
and embody. M This has been justified, first, by the psychological 
reason that a conjugal union cannot be expected to provide emotional 
intensity and passion as great as that aroused in the irregular or 
exceptional circumstances we have mentioned; and second, by virtue 
of the adaptation of the reality to a symbol; the aim of a union is the 
unconditioned state, and a secret union that is free from or even 
violates all sanctions or social ties symbolizes better "the rupture 
imposed by all genuine religious experience" (in truth it would be 
better to say "initiatory experience"). 35 Eliade noted in this 
connection that to Hindu eyes the conjugal symbolism (the 
"Bridegroom" and "Bride") in use in Christian mysticism does not 
sufficiently underline the separation from all ethical and social values 
which is imposed on him who tends toward the absolute; and 
therefore arises the choice, as an ideal model of the myth, of a couple 
such as Radha and Krishna 36 and, as companions of the Siddhas and 
Viras, of young women without restrictions as regards caste, whose 
person will be less important than a certain power or special fluid in 
them able to feed an intense "scaring** process. A man of weak 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



233 



disposition is forbidden other women than his own, but this 
restriction, according to the predominant opinion of the Hindu 
Tantras, is withdrawn, and no extrinsic restriction is imposed if the 
state of siddha-zira is reached. We have already spoken of the 
symbolism in graduated degrees of woman's nakedness and stated 
the fact that only an initiate of a high grade can utilize fully naked 

women. 

Another word used to designate a young woman is rati, which 
means literally the object of rasa, intoxication or strong emotion . The 
Sahajiya school distinguishes three kinds of rati: the sadharani or nor- 
mal woman, who seeks only her own immediate satisfaction in 
coitus; the samanjasa, who seeks to participate with the man; and the 
samartha, who is capable of total and super individual abandon. Only 
the last type, it is said, is a suitable young woman. 37 Desire or kamam 
its various grades is also made the subject of elaborate distinctions in 
some texts. In essence, animal desire is contrasted with that which 
might be called "the Great Desire which unites body with spirit well 
beyond the union of bodies in the Little Desire." 3 

Next there is an interesting detail that indicates the exclusion of 
the Demeter (motherly) capability as compared with the Aphrodite 
or Durga capability in the young women concerned; women who 
have been mothers arc not allowed to take part in practices of a Tant- 
ric nature. A saying of a modern writer" 9 sums up the theory that is 
most likely the basis for this rule: "Just as a woman loses her physical 
virginity in her first coitus, so she loses her magical virginity when 
she becomes a mother." When she becomes a mother, her employ- 
ment in practices of a higher type ends. 

Tantra holds that the act of human love reproduces a divine action. 
In Tantric iconography, the predominant type of union between god 
and goddess would lead one to suppose that Tantrism of the Left 
Hand adopts as its fundamental ritual position the viparita-maitkuna, 
which is characterized by the man's immobility. Besides the 
symbolic reason already given, its choice may also be practical. 
During coitus, the man must be allowed to exercise a special 
concentration of his mind on what occurs and takes shape in his 
consciousness, so that he can react suitably, and this is certainly 
easier for him if his body stays still. Moreover, the position in 
question is confirmed by one of the names given in these circles to 
both the woman, lata, and the activity, latasadhana, for lata 
(literally "liana" or "creeper") is linked to one of woman's positions 
proper to this inverted form of coitus (the treatises on profane erotics 
have, in ibis regard, names such as Lataveshiilaka and 
Vrishmthirudhitka). The aKpressioii we generally find in ihe lexts is 
"embraced bv I Ik* woman" bin urn ihe opposite; and I his, loo, leads 



234 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



235 



us to believe that the woman plays the active part. Thus, on this plane 
as well, metaphysical significances are activated which correspond to 
the essence of the male and female. 

Tantric Sexual Practices and Their Dangers 

We have already observed that the initiatory forms of Tantrism are 
differentiated from the orgiastic ones by a particular system of coitus. 
The special method consists in preventing ejaculation and 
withholding the seed at the moment when all the emotional and 
physiological conditions exist for the seed to be injected into the 
woman. This point is often expressed in coded and mystical terms, 
but there is fundamental agreement in the main texts of these 
schools, such as the Hathayogapradipika, the Goraksha-samkita, the 
songs of Kahna, and the Subkashiia-samgraha as well as various 
works of the Vajrayana. The first of these texts directs that, when in 
the progress of coitus "the bindu [seed] is about to be injected into the 
woman, it must be forced to reascend with an extreme force. . . . The 
yogi who withholds his seed in this way overcomes death because, 
just as the seed when ejected leads to death, so the seed when 
withheld leads to life," 40 This is abviously connected to the doctrine 
of the virya, the hidden force of manhood. Thus we should not take at 
face value some expressions in the texts that seem to suggest a merely 
physical and physiological process, as if it were only important to 
save the material substance of the seed. Such references in Hindu 
Tantric writings and also Chinese Taoist books should be taken with 
a grain of salt. Rather drastic measures are prescribed, such as 
manual action in Taoism and, in the Hindu work mentioned before, 
an auxiliary strangulating action exercised by the female organ on the 
male organ at the moment of emission, a normally counterproductive 
action because it usually arouses feelings that lead to ejaculation. 
Both the Hathayogapradipika and the Dhyana-Bindu-Upanishad 
recommend the suspension of breathing by means of the system 
called kheckari-mudra, with which fakirs and yogis can also enter into 
a cataleptic state. Under this condition, the texts state that 
ejaculation should not take place "even if a man is embraced by a 
young and ardent woman," It is hard to conceive of a man attaining 
such a state without isolating himself completely from any erotic 
situation, which would destroy the basic process of fluidie 
amalgamation and turn everything into a rather insipid exercise of 
skill. Directing the mind to something else and stopping the breath 
are methods considered by the Hindu writings on profane erotics to 
hinder or retard the emission of seed. But the operations of yoga arc 
carried out differently. Without doubt, breathing is controlled so 
that coitus does not reach its usual outcome and "the seed does not 



L 



flow downward"; 41 but in this case it is not a question of paralyzing 
the inner process by means of a temporary halt or withdrawal. It is 
rather a matter of releasing the liminal erotic emotion from its almost 
forced physiological, conditional quality, consisting precisely in 
ejaculation, in the normal man. 

In such a context success in retaining the seed can have the signifi- 
cance of both cause and effect. It is an effect where there is desire 
which is particularly aroused and refined (and we shall hear shortly 
from a witness that in Tantric circles an actual preliminary training is 
also provided for arousing such a desire). In the sphere of profane 
sexuality, cases exist where a high degree of desire in man can hinder 
the normal physiological outcome of coitus. Furthermore, this same 
phenomenon is brought about every time consciousness is displaced 
to the subtle plane, since the displacement involves a certain separa- 
tion of the psychic processes from the parallel organic processes. 
This also takes place in the profane field; the use of drugs and alcohol 
(material means to bring about a partial and passive displacement of 
ordinary consciousness toward the subtle plane) sometimes affects 
ordinary man so that he cannot ejaculate in coitus or can do so only 
w T ith great difficulty. In such conditions he may experience a 
pervasive* ecstatic, and prolonged form of "pleasure" such as is 
sometimes found in dreams, a condition that corresponds to the 
subtle state. It is precisely for this effect that the ancient or Eastern 
profane ars amatoria employed certain drugs. Given the premises and 
prerequisites, the sexual activity of the Tantras is fulfilled, like all 
magical and ritual activity, not in a state of ordinary awareness but in 
one of clear-minded rapture or trance ("intoxication with astral 
light"), which involves the arousal of the subtle state and therefore 
prevents the physiological crisis of ejaculation. This condition, 
which is undesirable and may even cause neurosis in the normal lover 
intent only on speeding up his own physical orgasm, is instead a 
favorable condition in these Tantric practices because it assists inner 
and not merely physiological inhibition and the consequent 
transformation both of the aroused force and of the entire experience 
brought about by woman and coitus. 

At the same time we should bear in mind the other aspect: that the 
stopping of the seminal emission is the cause of the displacement of 
consciousness and, at its ultimate, of transcendence. The violent 
preventive action of the man who "must not lose control of himself at 
all levels of emotion" may produce at the highest level of coitus and 
amalgamation with the woman a traumatic breakthrough in level of 
consciousness., like a Hash of lightning representing the highest 
do'rei'ol the crisis produced in profane erotics, even (hough close lo 
:i eonditioii <>l |vi\sivitv, ol' mimed :iw:iivness, and of physical 



236 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



orgasm in the partner. The same is the purpose of the technique of 
stopping the breath at the moment before the seminal emission, since 
the corresponding physiological process is already in process; here it 
is desired to release the force aroused by this physiological 
conditional quality and make it act on a different plane as a force that 
for one moment destroys the individual limit effectively and "kills" 
or "halts" the mental faculty. 

In the commentaries on a text mentioned by Eliade 42 it is in fact 
said that by halting the seed the thoughts also are halted. The "men- 
tal faculty" (manas) is "killed" (excessus mentis in the form of an active 
ecstasy). But it is precisely at that time, the commentary adds, that 
there also begins the absorption of the "pure grain of the lotus" or of 
the female rajas. 

We shall come back to this last point later on. In the meanwhile, it 
seems clear that the essence of these practices is the highest and most 
conscious arousal of "physical" love as a "force that kills" (it "kills 
the obscure tyrant," the individual ego, as Rurni said). 43 With her 
fluid and her "fire," woman provides a substance that dissolves and 
liberates, the poison being transformed into Water of Life. There- 
fore, the texts of Buddhist Tantrism attribute to the yogini, the 
female companion of the yogi, the power of "freeing the essence of 
the ego," and a Buddha is presented to us who achieves the 
awakening and attains nirvana in this way by using the woman. 44 In 
this respect, the point of complete amalgamation is decisive, the so- 
called samarasa, a word which was translated incorrectly by 
Shahidullah, in an almost profane way, as "identity of enjoyment" in 
coitus. 45 In fact, it is a matter of something much deeper and more 
radical because its counterpart is said to be the stopping, 
immobilization, and union of shukra and rajas > words that mean the 
male "seed" and the female "seed." Just as in practices that belong to 
yoga alone the suspension of breathing plays a part in the techniques 
used for the awakening of the kundalini, so the same power is 
assigned to the stopping of breath and the seed at the highest point of 
erotic amalgamation; and by means of this power it is also possible to 
arouse the kundalini and cause the ascending lightning current in the 
act of union. It then happens that "the identity of enjoyment" (of the 
two) ceases to be the spasmodic and carnal identity of a few moments, 
after the attainment of which the process is ended and the union 
ceases. Instead of being an end, the identity is a beginning, and for 
the sukha or pleasure, too, an aropa or transubstantiation takes place. 
The pleasure is "fixed" in a state that in its own way is continuous 
("devoid of growth or falling off) and that represents the 
transcendent dimension of all experience. As regards this, it is as if 
the union took place on a nonphysical plane without being rcsirieicd 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



237 






to one single moment; mention is made of sahaja-sukha or 
nongenerated or nonconditioned pleasure-ecstasy, an idea that can 
be understood only by referring to the traditional theory of the 
everlasting and omnipresent elements. According to this theory, fire, 
for instance, exists everywhere as an element, identical to itself, 
outside space and time; the processes of combustion do not 
"produce" It; they only provide the conditions that are normally 
needed for its manifestation at a given place and time. But a yogi can 
also call upon the fire "in himself 1 apart from these conditions. In the 
same way a nongenerated continuous pleasure is thought of, outside 
space or time, connected to the everlasting union of the cosmic male 
and female mythologically, of the God and Goddess, of Shiva and 
Shakti, of Radha and Krishna. Of this pleasure, "which neither 
comes nor goes," the pleasure felt at a given moment by a pair of 
lovers can only be a particular fleeting apparition in time, linked to 
the physiological and to the psychic and emotional conditional 
qualities of human coitus. Now, the magical and ritual Tantric 
unions produce the occurrence of a timeless "pleasure in itself 
linked to the nondual state, the highest unity, the unconditioned. 4511 
The peak that is experienced hazily in normal coitus for one single 
moment when the seed is emitted into the woman and held by the 
woman is "fixed" or stabilized in a Tantric coitus by the change of 
plane; it leads to a state of a considerable length ("without end") 
which is no longer physiologically conditioned and is considered, 
above all by Buddhist Tantras, as the threshold of the Great Freedom 
and "perfect enlightenment." The wave of pleasure that arises 
becomes exactly the same as that of the enlightenment-thought 
(hodhichitta) which is lit and goes up from below toward the head, as 
in yoga. 

This continuity is fed, like the flame of a fuel, by the subtle sub- 
stance of the woman; and here we are dealing with what the text cited 
earlier called the absorption of the rajas during the state in which the 
seed is stopped. Thus there develops the stationary, motionless 
alchemic union of Shiva with the substance of his bride in an active 
sense, which in the end leads beyond the solely ecstatic moment 
itself. 

The texts do not state clearly whether the technique of the stop- 
page should also be exercised by the mudraoi shakti -during coitus. A 
corresponding technique, the amoroli-mudra, is prescribed for the 
woman, but it is mentioned separately by enumerating the special 
powers thai it provides lor the woman without any mention of syn- 
chronizing il with [lie analogous aci of the man. 16 In any event, 
this let Imiqiie contemplated for I he woman confirms I he 11011- 
physiologival side o| such procedures. In faei., in ihe ease of a 



238 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



woman there is no need to inhibit a process of ejaculation or to 
withhold a substance comparable to the male seed; as is known, a 
woman has vaginal and some uterine secretions, especially those of 
Bartholin's gland (secretions that the Hindu writings on profane 
erotics call "water of love" or "water of the god of love"), which 
normally are activated with her general state of sexual arousal 
without being restricted to the point of crisis, as is the case for man. 
The word rajas used frequently in Tantric texts has more than one 
meaning; one indeed is "menses"; obviously there can be no question 
of stopping menses during coitus, and it most likely refers to the 
force whose effect is felt bursting out at the erotic peak that the 
woman, too, has built up and held. This force in woman is the 
counterpart of the vitya or transcendental manhood. In woman it 
bears the same relationship to the menses as the virya bears to the 
seed as sperm. It is the force that ancient peoples thought of as the 
"female seed" and which they believed necessary for procreation. 
Some have been in too great a hurry to declare that the concept of 
"female seed" is mistaken and fanciful, although it was 
acknowledged in Europe also, up to the eighteenth century, because 
the thing in question was casually linked to the menses or vaginal 
secretions. Like the virya, the "female seed" has a hyperphysical 
nature; but in considering everything in general that normally 
constitutes in woman the means needed for generation, we may well 
speak of a physical and psychic whole that also includes the menses 
and secretions on its physical side. When the Tantras speak of the 
male seed and female seed as of two principles which, by uniting, 
generate the ascending current of enlightenment in the same way that 
in normal coitus the sperm and the ovum, by uniting, generate the 
first nucleus of the embryo, they are actually referring to the 
hyperphysical counterparts separated, with held 5 fixed, and brought 
to amalgamation; and it is for good reason that the texts of the 
Vajrayana establish likenesses between these and the two currents, 
ida and pingala or lalana and rasa?ia, which in ascetic yoga are halted 
and caused to flow together, as we have already noted. 4 ' If we wish to 
translate rajas as "menses," it should be understood in the meaning 
of the ambiguous magical force or special mana, which we mentioned 
earlier (see chapter 4), To withhold the menses should be related to 
the full conversion of the motherly capability of woman into the 
merely Aphroditic capability, with the consequent effect of creating 
an extreme sexual fascination and demonic saturation. But there is 
another meaning of the Sanskrit word rajas. Besides "red" (whence 
arises the link with the menses), besides the philosophical meaning 
proper to it in the traditional doctrine of the guria, and besides the 
meaning of die pollen of a flower (especially ol ihc lotus), rajas is 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



239 



synonymous with tejas, fire or radiant energy. This meaning is 
pertinent to the nature of the subtle substance of the woman. The 
ancient texts reflect this connotation when comparing sexual union 
to a sacrifice in the fire and woman and her sexual organs to the flame 
of the fire itself. 48 Rajas is the substance that feeds the process of 
dispersion and of ecstatic union during magical coitus. The following 
saying in an ancient Egyptian text may have a meaning that is not 
only profane: "A woman's body burns like fire." 

To clarify the theory that the transcendent state is achieved by 
means of the union of the skukra with the rajas, we must first recog- 
nize that in this context these words cannot be taken in their literal 
meanings of sperm and menses. They refer to the two principles, 
male and female, which must be conserved and fixed by hindering 
their dissipation and degradation in the animal, physiological pro- 
cess. Then the woman performs a simultaneous action in the 
samarasa. Indeed the Dokakoska say that not only the shukra but also 
the rajas (female seed) must be immobilized to achieve the desired 
state. 49 It seems that this is not always the case in Taoist sexual 
practices, which are partly aimed in another direction. At one point 
Paracelsus wrote, "God preordained birth in such a way that fantasy 
is hidden in two persons, the imagination in one of them being 
adapted to the imagination in the other, the imagination of man being 
adapted to that of woman, and vice versa. For man has only a half 
imagination but has a whole one together with woman." 50 This idea 
could be fittingly applied to the situation we are discussing; the 
integration of two living imaginations, which are magnetized by 
desire and which meet each other, is the inner counterpart of the 
Tantric system of coitus. 

Finally, the participation of the woman in the fixation process 
would seem necessary for a practical reason as well. The mudra 
adopts the inverted ritual position and plays her active part. If she 
were to abandon herself in climax, she would be unable to go on 
playing her part, and her orgasm would bring the process to an end. 

Furthermore, some curious expressions of the Sahajiya school 
regarding the system of coitus may be of interest: "In love dwells I he 
shiver of joy, and above this shiver is the flow [the beginning of I he 
continuous state] and above the flow is the flow [ihe arrival of the 
new state through fixation]," "There is water on the earth, and above 
this water rises the wave; love remains above ihis wave |ihis is a 
reference l<> the surpassing of ihe point of the erotic crisis |; is (here 
anyone who knows this?" Ami also, the phrases "In immerse 
oneself in I he depths of [tie ocean without heiominj» wt-l** mid "hi tie 
an elephant with a spider's lilaineiil" ' are references to details ol I In 
inner ai I . We have alreadv discussed the nielaphoi ol ii< luij*. the liRiT, 



240 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



a situation in which dismounting entails grave consequences, for 
then the tiger would seize the rider and destroy him. We shall deal 
later on with the consequences of the failure of the method of coitus. 

We must comment briefly about the kind of training needed for 
the higher forms of these practices. The rule is that the young woman 
is first "adored" and then possessed (in the ritual, two different posi- 
tions are indicated for the couple; in the first phase the woman is on 
the man's right, in the second on his left), "To adore," in its highest 
degree, means "to make an object of worship" by invoking in the 
woman the presence of the goddess Tara, who gives salvation, or of 
other images of the female principle. Here there is a certain similarity 
to the adoration of woman proper to the medieval Worshippers of 
Love. An interesting detail is that in the phase of adoration, the 
nature of Radha, a woman, is often attributed to the man although 
his essential nature is Krishna, the divine male. While the man 
remains in the profane sphere, he belongs to the female nature and 
does not possess true manhood; he has to set aside the presumption 
that he is already a piirusha (the embodiment of true manhood, 
without motion) if he wishes to enter into the sphere of the 
everlasting. 53 In mysticism, a feminine role is often attributed to the 
soul, as the bride or beloved of the heavenly lover. In Vaishnavic 
Tantrism this relationship sometimes holds, but as an exception or 
splinter of the central concept. The process develops as a 
surmounting of that condition and inversion of polarity- The woman 
is adored first as a living embodiment of the goddess and a bearer of 
the supersensual, the health -bringing and enlightening force, as we 
said; then she is possessed and made to pass from the right to the left. 

It is possible to glean some interesting data regarding the prepara- 
tions for the sexual rite from a Bengali manuscript summarized by 
Mahindra Mohan Bosc. 54 A long and hard discipline is required to 
nourish the desire and, at the same time, to keep it in check. During a 
first period, the man must serve the young woman (technically equi- 
valent to the medieval "service of love") and sleep at her feet in the 
same room. Next he will share her bed for four months, keeping her 
on his right, a position appropriate to the phase of "adoration." He 
will then sleep with her for another four months, keeping her on his 
left, always desiring her but having no physical contact with her. it is 
only after this period that coitus is allowed. This rather formal proce- 
dure has a twofold purpose; on the one hand to refine and heighten 
desire for the woman without actual contact (as though the quintes- 
sence of platonic love is made into a technique); on the other hand, to 
develop control to such a degree that in coitus and in the dispersive 
integration with her fluidic substance, her rajas, it will be possible in 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



241 



halt the seed and to deviate the wave of feeling at the peak of the 
erotic crisis. 

We may, therefore, speak of a preliminary discipline in an unusual 
form of asceticism just as we may talk of a superascetic achievement 
different from mystical ecstasies in relation to the highest purpose 
sought with these techniques. This was particularly emphasized in 
Buddhist Tantrism, the Vajrayana. These teachings went so far as to 
conceptualize a Buddha very different from his usual image, a 
Buddha who had conquered Mara, the goddess of the earth and 
death, and attained to absolute enlightenment through the rites of 
sexual magic and union with women ("Women are divinities, they 
are life," the Buddha said, according to one text). 5> Moreover, this is 
not just a question of sex thought of as one means to achieve nirvana. 
The specific point we want to emphasize is that in the Vajrayana the 
highest slate of I he mahasukha. when the Buddha is copulating with 
Shakti, is positioned in rank beyond the state of nirvana itself 
considered unilaterally, that is, as ecstasy separated from the world. 
This is the essence of the doctrine of the "fourth body" of the 
Buddhas, called makasukha-kaya; united with their Shakti, they are 
united in her with the root of all manifestation, and that means that 
they are lords both of immanence (samsara) and of transcendence 
(nirvana), words that in these teachings no longer form an antithesis. 
As regards experience, therefore, we may think of a surpassing of the 
ecstatic state or of mere excessus mentis (death of the mind), when 
understood passively or "mystically/' Furthermore, this is a purpose 
that was consciously supposed in other trends of Hindu metaphysics. 
For example, it was said, "Do not allow the intellect to enjoy the 
happiness that comes from the ecstatic condition [samadhi] but, by 
means of the practice of discrimination, free it from the love that it 
feels for that happiness/' 56 

Like meanings can, in general, be found behind the symbolism 
and terminology of the teachings we are speaking about. If it is 
I bought that every man is potentially a Buddha, then the female par- 
ticipant, besides being called mudra and shakti (because she embodies 
Shakti in the flesh), also has the name of vidya, which means "know- 
ledge" in a sense often confused with prajna or enlightenment. This 
signifies that the woman embodies the principle that can arouse the 
potential Buddha quality in man. In the same context for which the 
woman of the Worshippers of Love awakens Madonna Intelligenza, 
I he health bearing Understanding, the Holy Wisdom that activates 
l lie "capability of intellect" present in a lover, she is here the living 
symbol ol the pnrjita (enlightenment) and enfolds the prajna in the 
depths of her own being. Furthermore, in these schools the mystery 



?^ 



242 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



243 



of the fulfillment is often presented in the symbolism of the union of 
padma and vajra\ these are two polyvalent words, since they have 
both an abstract, metaphysical, and doctrinal meaning and a 
concrete sexual one. They can allude to the female and male sexual 
organs (the "matrix of the Buddhas") or to the scepter-lightning and 
diamond (symbols of the force and the fixed, incorruptible and 
sovereign principle of being). In other cases, the two words used are 
prajna and upaya — namely, the enlightenment force or else the 
technique^ the "suitable means/' or the "acting power" — which 
unite and lead to the highest achievement. Once again, we are dealing 
with a union l hat is thought of sometimes in only abstract., 
metaphysical, and spiritual terms and at other times within a 
background of the sexual act, for once again there is an ontological, 
magical, and analogical likeness between those principles and 
everything designated by the foregoing terms {upaya and prajna), 57 
Now, the point that can be deduced from this context and that we 
want to emphasize is the accentuation obtained by the male principle 
owing to the fact that a female character is given to the enlightenment 
force which in the symbolism of the holy marriage takes the part of 
the woman possessed by the male in coitus, for it is generally 
acknowledged that the vajra may also assume a phallic significance. 
This is an indication for the "magical" purpose of such teachings; in a 
certain way we are brought back to what we said earlier about the 
deaths of Beatrice and Rachel and the Hermetic symbolism of incest. 
We may ask ourselves to what extent the Tantric sexual practices 
lead to the same results as the purely yogic awakening of the 
kundalini. The writings show clearly that the awakening can be 
brought about by means of woman. We directed the reader's 
attention to phenomena of profane sexuality (e.g.. certain cases of 
hebephrenia) that can be explained as effects of a partial awakening 
of the basic force. The hyperphysical physiology of yoga indicates a 
center near the one in which the kundalini sleeps, called the 
yonishihana, and it is said that herein, under the sign of carnal desire, 
a union of Shiva and Shakti can be produced, almost like a foretaste 
or reflection of that highest union which, according to the teachings 
of yoga, will be fulfilled in the corona region of the skull. This also 
makes us think of the possibility of a convergence of the two 
techniques. Besides, there are texts in which the woman loved and 
possessed is shown as the living symbol of the same kundalini or 
ckandali. The predominant view, however, is that through sexual 
practices it is possible to arrive onLy in passing at the sahaja or highest 
nondual state beyond the ego and nonego, but that this achievement 
is hard to stabilize and is, as it were, only a surprise feat, and dial ii is 
impossible to proceed wilhall I lie operations contemplated by vog;i 




with the kundalini ascending. Indeed, this is precisely the objection 
raised by the adherents of pure yoga against the practices just 
mentioned. 59 In conformity with this, the writings of Buddhist 
Tantrism, too, often speak of teachers who, after attaining 
enlightenment by means of sexual practices, keep far away from 
women and follow another path, proclaiming a strict doctrine. 
However, this is not the case with the Siddhas and Kaulas, nor with 
groups among whom such practices are even considered as 
operational magic. 

If, as we have seen, the possible outcome of a badly performed 
awakening of the kundalini in yoga may be illness, madness., or 
death, it should be obvious that the same risk is present to an even 
greater extent in Tantric sexual practices, because the process is 
harder to direct and control in the right way owing to the intrinsic 
nature of human sexuality. If the bindu (the seed and its 
corresponding principle) falls during coitus, the consequence will be 
a more fearful bondage. 60 In particular., the danger may be complete 
sexual intoxication, for the female force will have been absorbed in 
the deepest layers of the man's being and the elementary energy of 
sex and desire will have been aroused. If the transmutation or 
inversion of polarity does not then take place because the tendency 
toward mere lustful pleasure has remained predominant, even if only 
unconsciously, the result may be an irrevocable intoxication of the 
man's real being. In such a case a man may be degraded to the level of 
a "devil" or an instrument of the force that he had set out to master. 
This is also the risk involved in what some people call "red magic." 
Whereas the real purpose of Tantric practices is to use the experience 
of sex as a means to establish contact with the supcrsensual, the real 
purpose of red magic is the opposite: to use super sensual contacts 
(sometimes with the help of drugs) to intensify the sexual experience 
and, especially, to prolong abnormally the duration of the orgasm 
and pleasure but without changing its nature in the sense indicated 
above. The risk of Tantric practices lies indeed in remaining on that 
plane, even without understanding the fact property. 

The Greek myth of Nessus' cloak imaginatively depicts that abor- 
tive outcome. To bind Heracles to herself with love and desire, 
I Jeianeira sent him a magnificent cloak that she had obtained from 
Nessus and that was soaked with a love potion; but the love potion 
was in fact a philter of death, Heracles felt his body poisoned and his 
veins burning with unquenchable fire that even Deianeira's suicide 
could not expiate. Only by his own sacrificial transfiguration in the 
lire on Mount Aetna could Heracles be saved. The lire was replaced 
liv divine lij'hiniiir,, which transported Heracles Ui Olympus, where 
In 4»li[;iiiird I li*lu\ evrrinsfiiiK voiiiIl, ns his bride, The nieaiiiiij 1 . ol 



**' 



244 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



245 



this legend is clear: the elementary woman who is evoked and 
absorbed can become the starting point of a deadly and 
unquenchable thirst. At that stage, only an Olympian "flash of 
lightning" can take one back to the original immortalizing purpose of 
the union. 

The obsessive situation was well illustrated in a romance of Mey- 
rink with precise reference to the ideas of Tantrism. He described a 
character who was subjected to the power of the goddess aroused in a 
woman as in one of her previous incarnations to such an extent that 
he lost the principle of supernatural manhood (here symbolized by a 
spear-dagger, which can be made to correspond to the scepter- 
diamond or vajra of the Oriental doctrine). The woman, who had 
already been possessed physically, then went on to act in a 
hypersensual or subtle form as a kind of fascinating and bewitching 
image "of her eyes and body and all her ruthless being." Meyrink's 
character expressed himself thus: "The succubus took complete 
possession of my sense . . . it was like a continual deadly thirst up to 
the point where either the goblet broke in pieces or God himself 
opened the prison. , , . My torment increased a hundredfold 
because Assia had, so as to speak, gone on to act on a more profound 
plane; she was less tangible to my senses but alway made her 
consuming presence felt. If at first my will sought to rid myself of 
her, yet the same will turned back against me and I felt myself 
burning with desire for her." There now appeared to him in a 
thousand enchanting images "the Naked One, the Sucking One, the 
Dissolving One," and, staying exactly the same in all these manifold 
images of fever, desire, and nakedness, the woman began to "enfold 
him within her aura and permeate into him, growing within him and 
around him" until he felt he was at the edge of perdition and "on the 
border of what the Wise Men called the eighth world or world of total 
destruction," 61 

Let us, finally, bear in mind that according to Hindu texts, he who 
wishes to set in motion the sexual techniques that lead to the 
mahasukha must have not only perfect self-control but also a healthy 
body strengthened with the disciplines of physical yoga; otherwise 
the mahasukha or ecstasy of the condition of union will lead to a 
darkening of the senses, "something like a swoon." 62 This detail is 
important; we can see how it is linked to the unfavorable states that in 
profane erotics, and particularly in woman, take the place of the 
transfiguring experience during coitus. 

We have dwelt somewhat on the subject of Tantric sexual rites 
because they demonstrate all the main themes we encountered in 
considering the metaphysics of sex both in the profane sphere of 
unintentional, passive, and tcndeniial (onus and in the sphere ol 




traditional sacred ceremonies. We have found again in these rites the 
practice of evocations and the appearance and arousal of the power that 
constitutes the deepest nature or ontological root of individuals of 
both sexes. We have considered as a part of the whole the practice of 
"platonic" desire, the refined psychic condition of rapture that is the 
essence of all eros. An exact premise in the practices is the potential 
independence from the ordinary physiological conditional qualities 
both of this desire and of the peak of "pleasure" itself which is 
brought about in coitus. The link between death and love (the love 
that slays, the death of love, the "death" in the spasm, in the orgasm, 
and in the bodily delirium) passes here from the romantic and solely 
emotional plane to the real and objective plane of an initiatory tech- 
nique in an experience wherein the break in continuity and the sub- 
mersion which in most cases corresponds to the trauma or final crisis 
provoked by union with a woman are replaced by a presence that is 
accompanied by or actually determines the breakthrough of level, 
the "slaying of the intellect" and the stroke of lightning of the 
"enlightenment thought" beyond the dual state. Finally, both the 
doctrine of the hermaphrodite as a key to the metaphysics of sex and 
also the idea that sexuality as a merely animal, procreative function 
represents a fall are confirmed by the techniques of the inversion of 
polarity and the withholding of seed. They are also confirmed by the 
concept of the kundalini, which, when aroused, becomes the force 
that* rather than feeding the circle of generation and reinforcing its 
bond, leads toward the sahaja? toward death lessness, toward the 
unconditioned. In these traditions we encounter the various 
elements like so many links in a chain, which provide us with a 
picture of the whole that we must have to obtain the deepest 
understanding of the individual phenomena, aspects, and 
capabilities of eros and sexual love. 

In what follows we shall provide information about other secret 
traditions on the same lines as the Tantric teachings. The new data 
thai can be gleaned, however, are more fragmentary, and we shall not 
always find the same clarity and level as regards the highest purposes 
o! the procedures. 

Scad Sexual Practices in Chinese Taoism 

The main source of information for the sexual practices of Chinese 
Taoism is material gathered by H. Maspero in a long and well-docu- 
inctiicd essay, to which we shall continually have recourse here. 6 * As 
a background, however, we should also keep in mind the "secret art 
ol the alcove," common in ancient China., which was dealt with by 
Robert II. van (nilik.' 1 ' 1 

r'irsi ol all, il is host to make clear what ir:ili/;ilions Taoism sets 






246 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



forth. Although Maspero is an authority in Sinology, we believe he is 
wrong in saying that the most general concept in Taoism concerns 
the immortal sequel linked to the "dissolving of the corpse"'; this is 
the case where, when the Taoist initiate dies, he does not leave a body 
behind him, but causes a sword or wand-scepter to be found in its 
place and arises again in an everlasting body, which is an essential 
transformation of his short-lived body. Instead, acording to 
Maspero, the Taoist esoteric teaching should concern practices 
regarding breathing and sex. This is not actually the case. The 
"dissolving of the corpse" has also been considered in other 
traditions, not as an ordinary religious idea but as the highest goal 
that an initiate of the topmost rank can hope to reach. Christianity 
itself asserts that Christ rose again and his body disappeared from the 
tomb. It also includes the doctrine of the "body of resurrection/* 
which Paul certainly took from the mysteries. In many traditions and 
legends is found the subject of mythical figures stolen or mystically 
vanished. The Taoist doctrine of dissolving of the corpse forms a part 
of this same category of ideas. 

The secret practices mentioned by Maspero may be procedures for 
accomplishing the transmutation of the body until its natural corrup- 
tibility is eliminated, so that it can then "dematerialize," leaving no 
residue. Or such practices may aim at the attainment of "everlasting 
life," in the sense of a "long life," ch'ang-sheng, or of a kind of extra- 
normal extension of individual existence with a reduction of the 
ordinary processes that alter the physical-vital and subtle framework 
of the organism. We would interpret in this way the operations of 
withholding) fixation, and nutrition of the original life principle, 
described in the treatise The Secret of the Golden Flower. If such is the 
case, these Taoist practices would be sharply differentiated from the 
Tan trie and Hindu yogic practices, since these aim at the 
surmounting of all conditional qualities and at the (Treat Liberation. 
However, there is a definite ambiguity, for the Taoist practices also 
emphasize the union of the male and female, the yang and yin, an 
equivalent to the attainment of the nondual state. The unresolved 
ambiguity may be attributed to the fact that "the most important 
instructions of Taoism are not found in the written texts of books but 
in formulas passed on by word of mouth/ 165 

Maspero distinguished the practices connected with breathing 
from those which employ sex as a means. It will be enough here to 
mention the former because they concern teachings like those we 
considered earlier when dealing with endogenous transmutation. 
Thus the notion recurs of the "space of the force" located in the yiu 
region of the body (the part of the body above the diaphragm is wng 
or male and I he pari below yin or female), to be exact, "three inches 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



247 




below the naval"; it is now properly called "the field of the lower ver- 
milion," tan-fien. Access to this field is blocked (by a threshold that 
"the divinities do not open readily"). Essentially the practice consists 
in controlling the breathing, in gaining possession of the vital 
principle of the breath, and, when the obstacle has been removed, in 
making the breath reach the field of the lower vermilion. The breath 
then meets the essence, also called "the breath of the mysterious 
woman"; being integrated in this way, the breath is "closed," or held 
for a long time, and leads to a special hyperphysical energy, which 
spreads and circulates throughout the whole body like a fluid, 
thereby regenerating and vitalising the body. Sometimes an 
ascending process is also considered by means of which the force 
from the lower center is taken toward the so-called field of the upper 
vermilion (situated in the head). It is then transformed into a fire "by 
which the body is set ablaze, so that the body has the brightness of 
fire." This is linked to the "melting of [physical] form" or of the body 
itself — being a melting, it is said, by analogy with the change of state 
worked by fire in solid metallic substances. We are thus brought 
back to the idea of a transformed body that overcomes death, 6 In 
this we find certain similarities to the teachings of kundalini yoga; the 
lower center, the fiery nature of the kundalini, the obstruction of the 
threshold of the axial path, the ascending process and the union of 
I he male and female (in yoga, Shiva and Shakti) at the top of the head. 
Let us now pass on from the Taoist breathing practices to the 
sexual ones belonging to the same tradition. In the handbooks on sex 
[lie term yin-tao ("hidden way") designates sexual union. Like 
I antrism, Taoism lays down the principle that, while the use of sex 
may be harmful for some people, it may be a means of spiritual 
ai tainment and health for others who have knowledge of its use. "To 
he united to a woman," it is said, "is like riding a horse at the gallop 
with rotten reins." But he who knows will experience no harm from 
copulation with women; indeed, he even obtains a benefit. "The 
Yellow Emperor," we read in the Yu-fang che-yao> "lay with 1,200 
women and became immortal; the common people only have one 
woman each and [in enjoying her] destroy their own lives. To have or 
doI i o have the knowledge; how could opposite results not arise from 

I lull?"* 7 

The knowledge concerns a secret doctrine; thus in the same text it 
is wi il I en that the procedure "is transmitted by the Immortals to each 
ill tier; they drink blood when swearing an oath not to transmit it at 
random." The scholar Teng Yn-tse repeats it: "This technique is ab- 
Mihiielv socrel; never transmit it except to wise men!" Another 
Taoist scholar, Ko I long ( ol the few rlli century), alter having under- 
lined I In- j'.real importance of (lie "practices of the alcove" {fii»n- 



248 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



249 



chong-che-fa) said of the highest purpose to be pursued with them, 
"This recipe is passed on by the True Men to each other by word of 
mouth; in origin it was not written down. If a man does not know this 
efficacious procedure [the practice of sex] he cannot attain to ever- 
lasting life even by using the most famous drugs" (Pao-p'u tsu, 8, 3b). 
We should not think, therefore, that texts alone will provide full 
clarification of this matter. 

Ko Hong actually cites various ends pursued by those who make a 
nonprofane use of sex. For some it is a matter of restoring depleted 
vital energy and of obtaining long life; others wish to strengthen their 
yang and disperse their yin; but the most important purpose should 
be to "make the essence return again to restore the brain," This is 
how Maspero's translation runs; 69 but whether or not the word 
"brain" was actually used in the text, it is obvious that the operation 
refers to the breathing practices we have just considered. This is not a 
question of the physical brain but of the "field of the upper 
vermilion" situated in the head. Indeed, we must generally 
remember that in teachings of this kind, all references of an 
apparently physical or physiological nature actually refer to a 
hypcrphysical "anatomy" and physiology. 

Even if we distinguish among these various end purposes, the 
general background of the practices always continues to be the union 
of the yang and yin, the male and female principles. It seems that the 
purpose attained in coitus depends on the varying arrangement of the 
state of union. A strange but also suggestive expression used for the 
sexual practice is "the coiling up of the dragon and the game of the 
tiger." The dragon symbolizes the yang and corresponds to the man; 
the tiger symbolizes the yin and is embodied in the woman. It should 
be borne in mind that, unlike other traditions, Chinese tradition 
considers the dragon a dual-natured creature, not only chthonic but 
also heavenly and kingly. Since the dragon symbolizes man 
according to its twofold nature, the developments of inner 
experience in the "game of the dragon and tiger" could perhaps be 
connected to the six situations of the yang attributed by the 
commentary to the six yang signs of the first hexagram of the / Cking. 
Starting from the bottom, the dragon passes from the phase where ii 
can be seen and little by little hurls itself onward, rises into the sky, 
and disappears. 

Age is important in the selection of the woman. She should not he 
older than thirty and is best if younger than eighteen or nineteen. As 
in Tantrism, she should not be a mother nor have had children: 
"Even if she is young, she cannov be used if she has had a child" { Yti 
fang pi-khtcu la). A special feature here is the commandment in 
change the female partner; a whole group of lexis emphasize this 



w 



point as essential. "It is necessary to change the woman after each 
excitement; it is by changing the woman that one attains everlasting 
life*" says the text cited above, and it adds, "If we are united always 
with the same woman, the breath of the yin will diminish, and the 
yield will be scanty. . . . the essence and the breath of the woman 
will become weak little by little, and she will not be able to render 
great benefit to the man." This is even interpreted in the sense of 
using many young women, one after another, and in another text we 
can read that "when the woman is changed several times, the benefit 
increases, and if the woman is changed ten times in a night, the 
highest and best degree [of the operation] will be reached," 

This, however, sounds less like an initiatory purpose or transcend- 
ence than sexual magic bordering on male "psychic" vampirism. 
This idea comes to mind from references in some texts to long life, to 
I he absence of illness, and to the body "becoming light" or being 
"made subtle" as an outcome of such practices. Further evidence 
shows that the texts sometimes recommend that young women who 
already know the technique should not be employed lest, according 

10 P'eng-tsu, the woman should obtain advantage from the coitus 
Id feed her ym and become immortal; a girl who has the knowledge 
will seek her own development and will not be of benefit to her com- 
panion, 72 Here there is no longer a two-sided game or experience 
from which both parties can obtain advantage by fusing themselves 
in i he states that develop during the act of love. Rather, in this case, 
t he man merely seeks a complementary fluidic substance to absorb or 
in use to excite himself, strengthening hisyang or dragon quality, the 
principle of his manhood, against the yin or tiger quality of the 
woman; and so he would prefer a companion not initiated into the 
secret and magical meaning of coitus so that he, not she, will obtain 
llie benefit and so that the yin will not prevail. Moreover, in the 
i real ises on the profane art of love, an antagonism is emphasized and 
I he woman is called the "foe*' because she lends to takeaway \heyang 
from the man. 73 Thus it is easier to understand the use of many 
women, when the man's goal is to absorb the female fluid and, 
vampireiike, to feed his own vitality. Sexual techniques are also 
known in India and Tibet for prolonging life within a similar 

1 1 a i nc work. To do this it is essential that, when a man copulates with 
ii woman and brings about her orgasm, he should not participate in 
i In* pleasure in any way; this allows for the vampirelikc absorption of 
I lie* vilal female energy. 71 furthermore, even in the Upanishads 
there are traces of an analogous ''aspirating" procedure intended to 
icniovr "i he seed" from llie woman tin ring coitus, preventing her 
limn cnikviviii) 1 .. The lexi s:iy?* thai liir (his purpose I he man should 
|nm Ins mouth lo llul ol (In* wonum, petielnile into her, lei mil his 



250 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



breathy and then breathe in again (and, most likely, hold his breath)* 
at the same time realizing in his mind the formula "With my force, 
with my seed, I do take her seed." (We spoke about the "female seed" 
earlier.) 75 This text even mentions something analogous to that 
considered in Taoism: the advantage of the man or of the woman 
depends on the possession of knowledge when they are joined 
together sexually; the man takes advantage of the "good works of 
the woman" with whom he is united if he has the knowledge; or the 
woman takes possession of the good works of the man if he lacks the 
knowledge and is unaware. The text adds that even men of the 
brahmin caste are without virility when they copulate with a woman 
without having that knowledge. 

However, everything does not end on such a problematic plane in 
Taoist secret practices. In actuality, the main technique does not 
differ much from that of Tantrism. The first phase of it is called the 
real art of equalizing, harmonizing, or mingling the breaths, or 
chang-k'i chen-chu; this is the technical name of the erotic 
preliminaries intended to revive the natural magnetism, kindled by 
the yin-yang relationship, to a special degree (if exaltation and 
harmony of the two. It is only after this state has been reached and 
nourished for a certain time that the two proceed to unite their bodies 
(Yu-fang che-yaOy lb). It is possible that the aim of these preliminaries 
is to reach the condition that, according to the Tantric ritual quoted 
earlier, is attained by passing a certain period of time with the woman 
in intimacy but abstaining from physical contact. Likewise, as we 
said, the practice of the coitus, huo-ho, is not very different here from 
the Tantric practice; in possessing the woman, the man should not 
reach the point of emitting his seed, 77 and should the process of 
ejaculation become activated, he must prevent it and bring his seed 
back so as to "withhold the essence"; this essence corresponds to the 
virya and the bindu, the principle of the magical manhood in 
Hinduism. The Su-niu-ching indeed says: "The essential basis of the 
technique consists in copulating with many young women without 
emitting the essence. " 7b It is a matter here of reawakening the 
primary force (the essence); as soon as the development of the love 
act has set that force in motion (one text says 3 "It should become very 
excited"), the process of ejaculation should be halted, and in some 
texts physical devices are even recommended for that purpose. Then 
the backward process takes place; the aroused and withheld essence 
goes up along the spinal column toward the "brain." This is called 
"the art of making the essence return to reintegrate the [center 
located in the] brain" — kuan-tsing pu-nao (Yu-fang che-y<io, lb)/ 1 ' 
"Penetrate only without emitting" is the repealed advice. The 
instructions of Lieu King arc, alter ihe breaths of the man and 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 25 1 

woman have been harmonized, to "penetrate when [word missing] is 
weak and withdraw when it is steady and strong," whereas another 
text says, "He who enters strong and withdraws weak will perish 
even when he has had the best destiny" [Yang-sing yen-ming hi. II, 13 
a,b). Maspero suggests "phallus" as the missing subject of the clause 
in the foregoing proposition. In these texts the male organ is called 
the "jade stem." But this interpretation seems to us rather awkward. 
Among other things, it would be difficult to imagine how this would 
work in practice on the physical plane. We suggest that a state and a 
force were originally implied. Not the sexual organ but the yang 
principle of the man should be "weak" at first and gradually 
strengthened during the development of the magical operation until 
it gains the upper hand over the .vim and can be withdrawn "hard." 
For this is one of the explicit purposes indicated by the texts. The 
ritualism is applied here so thoroughly that to perfect the practice, 
ihe "jade stem" should perform eighty-one strokes within the 
"strings of the lute," eighty -one being the complete yang number, 80 
This must seem a paralyzing mechanical process except under those 
very special circumstances in which, without wishing it, the 
intensely experienced realization of a significance leads 
spontaneously, we might almost say magically, to a corresponding 
precise symbolic structure in the physical act. 

Teng Yu-tse, the legendary figure of an "immortal" who seems to 
have lived under the Han dynasty in the second century, defined the 
twofold purpose thus: "to lessen the yin so as to strengthen the yang' 
and "to coagulate the liquor of the essence" (to fix the virya). Hl 
Maspero repeats the warning that, as with breathing techniques, 
these practices should not be undertaken without adequate training. 
Moreover, to dedicate oneself to them one must choose the right 
(lays, for a group of prohibitions founded on astrology exists in 
Taoism. For instance, the first and last days of the month, the 
periods of the first and last quarters of the moon, and the period of 
ihe lii 11 moon are forbidden, among other dates and unfavorable 
circumstances; in practice about two hundred days in the year are 
excluded for the "magical union of the dragon with the tiger." 82 Also, 
certain times are deemed favorable: being sober and unencumbered 
with loo much food, the man should operate with the woman in the 
"hour of the yang living breath after midnight" — another link in the 
thematic chain of woman, eros, and night. The practice assumes the 
ability «» meditate and concentrate. Preliminary rituals for making 
i lie union sacred, as in India and elsewhere, are not envisaged, but it 
js explicitly stated that the operation should be carried out in a frame 
ill mind d liferent from thai o( normal waking consciousness. "Every 
I imc I lit- practice r undertaken/ 1 ' said Tetij* Yu Isr, "it is necessary to 



w 



252 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



253 



enter into meditation; it is necessary first to lose awareness of one's 
body and then of the outside world." 8 - 1 This means that one must 
enter into a state of active trance so that, while carrying out material 
actions and without losing the sensation of the woman, the 
experience may proceed substantially on a subtle and hyperphysical 
plane. The ascent of the essence toward the higher sear> after the 
aroused force has been stopped and diverted from the normal 
direction of emission, should he accompanied by a mental projection 
that guides and directs the process. s+ 

Teng Yu-tse also refers to an invocation 85 at the end of which "the 
men will keep [their spirit fixed] on the kidneys, steadfastly with- 
holding the essence and distilling the breath, which follows the spinal 
column and ascends against the current toward the ni-huan; this is 
what is called 'causing to return to the Origin,* huan-yuan. The 
women, on the other hand, will keep [their spirit fixed] in the heart 
and nourish their spirits, distilling an unchangeable fire [the rajas as 
tejas in Hindu terminology] in their hearts and making their breath 
descend from their breasts to their kidneys, whence it will ascend 
again along their spinal column to arrive also at the ni-huan** This is 
called 'transformation of the Real/ hua-chen. Transcendence is 
reached after one hundred days. By practicing for a long time, one 
becomes spontaneously a real man, and the centuries will pass by 
with everlasting life. This is the method for 'not dying.' " 87 
Regarding this "not dying," we find the ambiguity we noted earlier 
It is hard to see whether it is just a matter of acquiring long life and 
compounding a kind of alchemic elixir (in fact, we sometimes even 
find expressions of the following type: "Whether you be young or 
old, you will become youths again") 88 or whether a sort of 
reintegration of a physical and "vital" nature is considered a 
consequential effect of a realization of a higher category, namely the 
realization of transcendent and everlasting life in a real sense. When 
faced with an ambiguity of this kind, we must always bear in mind 
the warning of the texts that the essentials of such initiatory teachings 
were only passed on by word of mouth. 

The information gathered by Maspero gives no indications of 
dangers involved in the sexual practice of union of yin and yang. 
However, these practices expose the participants to the risk of erotic 
intoxication if the man ejaculates during the magical coitus and the 
yin or tiger quality gains the upper hand over the yang or dragon 
quality. We reiterate that this may be why it is advised not to use 
young women initiated in the secret side of the practice lest they 
profit by a perilous development of the yin, which would completely 
invert the polarity of the practice. 

Besides individual sexual unions carried out by couple* in Lsola 



tion, some Taoist texts hint at collective practices that seem to have 
been a combination of ancient seasonal orgiastic rites (belonging to 
the spring or fall) with the real initiatory techniques mentioned be- 
fore. For these collective rites, the days of the new moon and full 
moon are stated to be favorable, although these same days should be 
avoided for individual sexual rites. The purpose of these collective 
rites of freeing the participant from his sins and keeping away bad 
luck that may arise from his own needs according to the "law of con- 
cordant actions and reactions" is similar to the purification or 
catharsis obtained by immersion in the formless (the "Waters"), 
which we discussed when dealing with the ultimate meaning of 
orgiastic rites in general. But there is a difference from these 
collective practices: the rule that the seed should not be emitted 
during coitus must be observed. The Siao tao Am States: "Those who 
lake part in the practice fulfill the true formula in the field of the 
vermilion; but they take care of the defended secret and do not let it 
out on their way." S9 The principle is that of promiscuity; indeed, 
nothing must hinder the exchange of women. The same text also 
hints at ensuring a protective (lucky) force for oneself against all 
danger, hostile influence, and devils. In the desired effect, the 
iiuainment of the pure male yang quality, we might recognize a 
parallel with the ancient ideas of the magical and exorcising power of 
(he phallus. But it is difficult to conceive of a practice of collective 
orgies consistent with the retention of semen. At best, we can 
conceive of the framework of a magical chain suitably organized and 
articulated (like the Tan trie "circles" to which we shall refer later 
on), a concept quite different from actual promiscuity. However, 
"f lungs which cannot be set forth in all their details" 90 are alluded to, 
and there is no doubt that such collective practices must have 
degenerated, as evidenced by writers who deplored the fact that in 
I lie age after the Wei and Tsin periods the practices led to the birth of 
children among the Taoists, 91 which implies that the participants let 
mailers take the normal "wet" course of human coitus. 

A ml* Sexual Practices and Hermetic Symbology 
i hgiasiic practices for mystic purposes have also been found in the 
A i ill* Persian region, but information about them is confined to a few 
comments by writers and travelers who were scandalized and unable 
to examine ihe corresponding traditions intelligently or understand 
I heir implications. Direct information regarding sexual practices 
thai I i;ive continued into our own times among Arab circles in North 
A Inch can be found in a report thai is pari of a recently published col- 
let livr work.'" 1 1 n ion wilh a woman is one of the means employed in 
ill oi isc ihe povvei oj ;i .] hi 1 1 u .< I inlluciuv (btmikah) siller iis 




254 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



potentiality has been established in the man by ritual initiation. It 
should be noted that this technique is chosen only for persons who 
are particularly drawn toward sex by their temperament; thus the 
predominating inclination forms a kind of raw material. Another 
interesting detail is that the ability to prove that the person in 
question cannot be hypnotized is an essential qualification. 94 This is 
a precaution against passivity or even susceptibility to a spell when 
the man enters into relations with the woman. We should recall here 
that Tantrism also warns of the danger that a fainting state or 
lassitude may take the place of the active ecstasy of the mahasukha. In 
the report, we find the unnatural method of semen retention: "The 
rule is that the union with the woman is to be performed so that in no 
case is its normal final end attained, that is, the seed must not be 
ejaculated. The organizations with which I came in contact had 
Berber girls at their disposal who were skilled in these practices, I 
believe that on each occasion they underwent an occult preparation. 
Furthermore, formulas (dhikr) were provided and no girl agreed to 
be used for the practices when these formulas were not used. During 
the whole night throughout which the experience had to last, Arab 
tea was used as a kind of strong concoction to which were added 
successive infusions of various herbs, which must have had some 
relationship with the level and progress of the experience/' 95 

The reporter continued, "The practice seemed to have a twofold 
purpose. Above all, there was self-control, different from mere 
resistance to temptation because all the normal physical and psychic 
conditions of bodily union with a woman were acceptable, nor was 
there any commandment to suppress the feelings that are usually 
aroused therein, with the sole exception that the emission of seed had 
to be controlled and prevented. Instead, the girls employed had 
precise instructions to use every means available so that that very 
thing would not take place. There was one queer detail; I happened 
to see these girls weeping when they succeeded in this 'spoiling- 
action and apologizing, for they say that they had had to obey an 
order." But the end to be attained through resistance and self-control 
was also a means, in that the forces awakened by the coitus 
performed in this way had to cause the trauma needed for 
enlightenment and contact with the suprasensual. 96 It is interesting 
to observe that, apart from these sexual practices, the author of the 
report was trained in rites of evocatory magic, which aimed not at the 
production of paranormal phenomena but at the development of self- 
control and power of command, since it is said that in evocatory 
experiences of the kind, without right attitude, one may incel 
madness at every step, and that is a risk thai we have also seen 
indicated as regards sexual practices/ 17 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



255 



To establish a link between the practices in this report and the way 
of Sufism, we might emphasize the "extinction," or f ana, which is 
followed by "stability,'* or tasis or baqa. We have already quoted Ibn 
Arabi as regards the system for making a union holy and the ritual 
identification of the woman with "cosmic nature." We can cite here 
another passage from the same scholar: "When the man loves the 
woman, he desires the union, namely the most whole union possible 
in love; and in the [bodily] form composed of elements no union 
exists which is stronger than that of the conjugal act. In it, the sensual 
pleasure spreads throughout every part of the body, and it is for this 
reason that holy Law bids us to wash the whole [of our bodies after 
the sexual act], for the purification should not be less whole than the 
wholeness of the extinction of the man in the woman during the 
ecstasy provoked by the sensual pleasure. Therefore, God, being 
jealous of His servant, does not suffer him to believe that he takes 
delight in a thing which is not He. Therefore he purifies his body 
| with the prescribed rite] so that he may turn in his vision toward 
Him in whom he has in reality been extinguished, there being 
nothing other than this," 98 Therefore there is a transposition of self- 
dissolution through the woman into self-extinction in the divinity 
through surmounting the illusory fact of individual and bodily 
sensual pleasure; this seems to be the key to the Islamic technique. 

It is hard to verify the existence of circles where analogous 
procedures were put into operation in medieval Europe or after. We 
have already written about special kabbalist groups and the Brothers 
of the Free Spirit, but in these cases it was a question of simple mystic 
sensuality, and we can find no signs of a special initiatory method of 
coitus. It is not impossible, however, that such a method was 
practiced in other, more secret surroundings. In another book 99 we 
cited a hermetic-kabbalist text, the Esk Mezamph (Fire of Puri- 
fication), which has been attributed to Isaac the Dutchman; in it 
i lie symbolism of the blow of the spear of Phineus, which pierced the 
sinning couple in the moment of coitus, thus leading to prodigies, 
may recall the Tantric and Taoist technique of halting the viiya 
during the love act. A similar meaning could be deduced from one of 
i he Chiam (Keys) of Basilius Valentinus, namely the eleventh. In it, 
l wo women are represented astride two lions, which devour each 
ul her in turn; the women bear a heart where the fluid of the Sun and 
ui the Moon arc poured and mixed. Nearby a warrior can be seen, 
hilly armed and with his sword uplifted, ready to strike (and halt the 

, I CO 
[II IHVSS), 

The hermetic kabhilisiic inicrprciation applied loTarot card XV, 
"The iK-vil," suj'.f'.csls sexual procedures. ltH The central figure has 
Mir Ie;uurr*, nl'ltaplimiui, llxseruM f'.addrss of (he Templars. The 



256 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



hermaphroditic figure with a ram's head has a pentagram marked on 
its forehead. The right and left arms are associated respectively with 
two alchemist-hermetic formulas. Solve and Coagula. In its right 
hand the figure bears a lighted torch that, representing Solve, might 
allude to the inner fire illumined during the operation. The left hand 
holds the ancient symbols of the male and female sexual organs 
united, and the corresponding Coagula might refer to the magical 
action of fixation that generates the hermaphrodite. Moreover, a he- 
devil and a she-devil can be seen low down in the hieroglyphic, lied to 
the stand on which there rises the central figure, which acts as the key 
for the whole. The two devils may correspond to the man and woman 
taking part in the operation under the sign of the central figure, the 
hermaphrodite bearing the sign of the pentagram. The man, with his 
left hand turned upward toward the lighted torch, is making the 
ritual sign of benediction, while his right hand is laid on his genitals; 
whereas the woman is touching the lower part of the hermaphroditic 
figure with her right hand and has her left hand on her own sexual 
organ. As she is on the side of the Coagula, this might allude to 
another meaning of this formula, "the coagulation of astral light," 
the state of fluidic intoxication that forms the woman's contribution 
to the operation. Thus, although embedded in the various parts of an 
abstruse and ambiguous hieroglyph intended to convey polyvalent 
meanings, a figure of this kind may allude to the various moments in 
the procedure of initiatory sexual magic. 

Concerning the actual hermetic art itself — and we mean here the 
secret doctrine that was transmitted in the West through the sym- 
bolic and elusive language of alchemical procedures —we have 
already said that the sexual interpretation is a possible one for the 
operations that the texts describe; but it is only one of the manifold 
number of planes to which every initiatory symbol, by its very 
nature, may refer simultaneously. In hermetic doctrine, erotic 
symbolism plays rather an important part, and the procedures it 
deals with might also be applied, in their outline, to the sphere of 
sexual magic in particular. We have already observed the importance 
\vhich the symbolism of the hermaphrodite, the Rebis, has in this 
tradition. Starting with ancient Hellenistic texts, it is stated that the 
essence of the Opem (Work or Interaction) consists of the union of 
male and female, 102 From the alchemical viewpoint, the male is 
Sulfur, a force linked to the ego principle and to the divine (the Greek 
word for Sulfur, theion, also has this meaning). The female principle 
has a number of designations: it is Mercury, the Water of Life, the 
Raw Material, the Universal Solvent, Divine Water, and so on. Ii is 
the Woman of the Philosophers, which is needed by "our Gold"; 
Gold can also signify ihc male in his "being" principle. "Our hodily 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Alagic 257 

Gold," said Philateles, 103 "is as if dead before it is united with its 
bride. Only then does the inner, secret Sulfur develop." A treatise by 
Ostanus said, when referring to the Woman, "In thee is hidden all 
the dreadful and wonderful mystery," 104 The first effect of the 
"hidden union," however, is dissolution, for the Female or Mercury 
acts as a solvent. From this point begins the phase called Black Opera 
or nigredo, in which the male, "Our King," dies. 105 Moreover, this 
crisis is undergone appropriately by the "bodily Gold," also called 
"common Sulfur"; it is the conditioned form of appearance of the 
principle of the personality, which can be called the "physical ego." 
By uniting itself to the Mercury or Divine Water, its enclosure is 
removed. Thus, after the crisis, the ecstatic condition appears, the 
light rises, and the "doves of Diana" are seen in the so-called albedo 
or White Opera (White Work or Interaction), which should be 
considered as the positive (transmutation of the negative) aspect of 
l he "system of the Woman" or "of the Moon." But it is essentially for 
the purpose of the overall affair that the man should have available 
what the texts call the "Steel of the Wise Men," the "seed of the 
( mid" or the "Incombustible Sulfur," names alluding to a power that 
is not "lit" (it does not let itself be transported) nor altered (Steel) but 
is conserved throughout these changes of state and, when the time is 
ripe, forms the beginning (seed) of a new development. This 
development corresponds to the third essential phase of the opus 
<iichemicim, which is the Red Opera (Red Work or Interaction) or 
mbedo, in which the condition of mere ecstatic opening is surpassed. 
Now Sulfur and Fire become active again; the male becomes alive 
and reacts on her who had dissolved him; he gains the upper hand 
over the female (the Turba philosophorum or Turmoil of the 
Philosophers said, "The Mother is always more kindly toward the 
Son than the Son is toward her"), absorbs her, and transmits his own 
nalurc to her. It is then that the union of the King and Queen, the two 
persons washed and stripped naked, also called "Incest," gives way 
10 [he person who is beyond the two, that is, the Rebis or crowned 
hermaphrodite, Sun and Moon together, who "has all power" and is 

immortal. 106 

Ah hough the texts emphasize the fact that these procedures of the 
hiTiuei ic art as applied to man reflect the very process of creation and 
i •nsinie manifestation in its essential moments (and we noted this 
nn licr), yet on the other hand it seems clear from this brief treatment 
how aptly the hermetic symbols and operations lend themselves to 
application on the plane of sexual practices. But, as we said, we 
believe I ha I, notwithstanding the wide use of erotic symbolism 
(sometimes in the most open ways; we lind in the texts 
M|in'.riil,ilii>i] m»1 i In- minis ol 'tin- Kin}- ami Oueen nuked with their 



258 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



organs variously intertwined), 107 in practice the ancient masters of 
hermetic doctrine did not follow the path of sex, and in order to 
reintegrate themselves with the female principle, to strip their Diana 
naked , to possess their Hebe, and to carry through to its end the opus 
transformationis so far as the generation of the crowned 
hermaphrodite, they did not have recourse to women. As far as we 
can tell, it has been only in recent times that some persons attempting 
to carry on the hermetic art have not abstained from the "path of 
Venus" but have interpreted the hermetic operations as referring to 
that path. 

In this respective might mention the circles that initiated Gustavo 
Meyrink in some doctrines that can be found written into his roman- 
ces in a form that is often rather lively and suggestive. However, 
some more direct evidence has been provided by the school of 
Giuliano Kremmerz (the pseudonym of Giro Formisano), who 
carried on his activity in Italy near the end of the last century and at 
the beginning of this within the framework of an organization or 
"chain" called "My nam." 

The Myriam and the "Fire Magic" 

In Christian mystical theology the Virgin Mary, the theotokos 
(Mother of God), is the personification of the church who, as bestowcr 
of supernatural life, gave birth to God, the "Christ within us/' We 
find a similar idea in Jewish esoteric doctrine with regard to the 
Shekhinah, who was also identified with the mystical and effective 
force of a given initiatic organization. Valli had already observed that 
in their secret language, the Worshippers of Love spoke of woman as 
both the "Holy Wisdom" and the organization that was the bearer 
and administrator of this force. Significantly, in the school of 
Kremmerz, we find the same idea: every man has his own Myriam or 
"woman," who is the fluidic essence or living double of his own 
being, Myriam is also the collective chain or fluidic life force of the 
organization, invoked as a being or a higher spiritual influence by 
every participant for his own spiritual and operational integration 
and for the purpose of enlightenment. 108 

Other references to the path of Venus in Kremmerz' s writings 
seem to be restricted to the lighting of a psychic fire ("fire magic") be- 
tween a man and a woman in a nonphysical relationship; therefore, 
the situation would seem similar to the special medieval forms 
already discussed. In general, Kremmerz said, "Magic, an active 
state of conquest of the will, belongs wholly to the male, but the male 
would not be such as he is unless the female lent herself to the male's 
impulse as a recipient." 109 The female essentially provides the "fluid" 
to arouse and magnet ize (he will and bring il, whether integrated or 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



259 






L. 



not, to a state of androgyny. But we shall come back to these 
possibilities or applications later on . Let us overlook, then, the use of 
woman as a medium guided by man until she becomes his powerful 
complement in a harmonious and loving relationship "which should 
exclude every unclean thought,'* 110 In general, Kremmerz admitted 
that the practicing magician cannot engage in relations except 
''where he possesses his fluidic opposite in a woman"; 111 thus is 
developed the necessity of a complement, or special polarity, as a 
requisite for strong erotic magnetism. This brings us to the saying 
that he who can distinguish where the soul begins and the flesh ends 
does not know what love is. l Here is how the start of 'Tire magic" is 
described; "Love begins to acquire a holy character when it puts the 
human soul into a state of mag or trance. Both the heavy and more 
subtle matter in man are seized by a state of magnetism so profound 
that first an intuition and then a feeling begin of a world that is not 
human but that reaches a human source in the hypersensitivity of a 
special condition of being, 7 ' 113 Kremmerz remarked that this exact 
state is brought about for a few instants in every love, but "the hard 
thing is to make it last intensely and conclusively"; it is also hard to 
prevent carnal desire from awakening, which would paralyze it. 
According to Krernrnerz's terminology, it has been mag if it has been 
active (active ecstasy) but trance if it has been passive. The subtle 
elements in man and woman come into contact magnetically, which 
makes possible a relationship with forces and influences belonging to 
(he hyperphysical plane. 114 

I ,et us next go back to a subject we already analyzed. When Krem- 
merz wrote that "through this door of love" magic truly begins when 
man, ''staying in rhe most unlikely intensity of the Pyr, or magic 
lire," actually sees in his lover a being proper to the level he has 
attained ("Diana will come unclothed"). But in union with such a 
being there begins, together with the magic, the danger of 
madness. 115 To summarize, Kremmerz formulated three secrets of 
t his art : ( 1) how to keep the holy fire burning strongly: (2) how to fuel 
it and make it everlasting; (3) how to unite oneself with the 
archetypal being using Solomon's seal (a symbol consisting of two 
overlapping and interlaced triangles, representing the male and 
lnn:ik\ the active and passive, the Fire and the Waters). This 
uih/ation might be linked to a writing on the Porta ametka^ a 
Roman monument ornamented with inscriptions and symbols. 
K i vintner/, illusl rated [ his in one of his books: Rex igne redit et coniugo 
lUitiilrf oaitlto (The king returns with fire and rejoices in his hidden 

I'm liter details ahmn "lluidic coil us" unci ma^ir love arc found in 
l\v<» monojM :i|>h , mainly inspired by Kivmmer/ and » onlainrd in a 



260 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



collection we have already cited. 117 The first states that "it is 
necessary that eros, the instrument of the work, should be innocent 
of sexual desire and lust. It must be love in the true sense, something 
much broader and more subtle^ without physical polarization; but its 
strength will be no less for this reason. It can also be said. 'You must 
desire the soul> the being of the woman, just as her body can be 
desired*' " Starting with these platonic conditions, eros propitiates 
in you the fluidic contact, and in its turn the fluidic state enhances 
eros. Thus an intensity of dizziness can be brought about which is 
unimaginable in the normal man and woman. "To love and desire 
each other in this way, without movement, in a continuous manner, 
mutually aspirating like vampires, in a state of exaltation that goes on 
without any fear of possible zones of dizziness. You will feel a sense of 
real amalgamation; you will feel your companion throughout your 
whole body., not by contact but in a subtle union that is aware of her 
at every point and pervades her like an intoxication that takes 
possession of the blood of your blood. In the end, that takes you to 
the threshold of a state of ecstasy," 

In his other monograph, entitled "The Magic of Unions," the 
same anonymous writer either refers to unpublished teachings of 
Kremmerz or is inspired directly by Tantric practices, making use, 
however, of the symbols of the hermetic-alchemical tradition. In this 
text 11 * the fluidic union without physical contact is considered a 
preliminary phase or condition. Following that, the union may also 
develop on the physical plane. "However accustomed you may be to 
that operation, which is intended only to lead to the magic state by 
means of an eros held and nourished in the fluidic body, on a second 
occasion the love and desire without contacts can be made to descend 
to the depths of sex, that is, of the life force that throbs in generation 
and is aroused through coitus." In this case it will lead, not to a sud- 
den breakdown of the magic state, but to its strengthening until the 
"love that slays" is attained. The same condition, however, is indi- 
cated in Hindu Tantric, Taoist, and Arabic practices; the peak of the 
orgasm should be reached but without emitting the seed. 

We shall not linger over the other details provided by the author, 
even though they are of a ritual category. We shall only observe one 
important point, namely that he distinguishes two phases in the 
experience, linked to the two systems of Water and Fire, Woman and 
Man, and Sun and Moon, of which the hermeticists wrote. The 
author said, "When the two die in unity and the spasm-crisis is 
resolved in a continuous state, you can call that which is experienced 
a kind of exalted, cosmic beatitude. . . . But mark well that this sialic 
is not the highest state, however irresistibly the urge may l lien aci in 
you In fix yoursell in lhai Stale and be mixed in it. II yon do lliis, you 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



261 



will not surpass the cosmic bond, and your path will end where erotic 
mysticism halts. You must be able to renounce this same beatitude, 
which is almost that of nirvana, by using the power of the Fire (which 
other men call the unnatural Fire), if the system of the Waters is truly 
to end, Woman to be thoroughly conquered, and Matter purified of 
all its wetness." 119 It is a matter here of a return to the condition of 
pure activity after the dissolution obtained by the union, through the 
woman, "with one's own poison"; the process goes on, in 
correspondence with the level of the Great Mysteries, in that 
antiecstatic (or, better, superecstatic) sense that we mentioned 
earlier, when we also cited a passage from the Manduka-Upanishad. 
Precisely on that basis there would be an essential difference between 
what the man and woman, in principle, can respectively draw from 
the experience: "The limit of the participation by the woman, I mean 
the limit of her attainment when she, being united with you, follows 
you, is that ecstasy in which the peak of the coitus is crossed and 
develops. Further than that the woman cannot go, owing to the 
irrevocable law of her own nature." This agrees with what we 
understood from the polyvalent symbols and terminology of the 
Vajrayana (Buddhist Tantrism) and with what can be deduced from 
the Taoist doctrines when they set up as an essential purpose of their 
sexual technique the distillation and strengthening of the puieyang. 

Like Kremmerz, the writer quoted above recommended the use of 
a special place reserved for the purpose, which only the couple could 
visit. By "suitable means of the magic of perfumes and consecrating 
signs," it is "saturated" and becomes "a fateful place in which you 
will experience almost a change in the woi nan's personality and will 
feel, as soon as you enter the whirlwind and rapture of your double 
operation, both psychic and physical coitus commence." This 
refers to the climate of the aropa or Tantric transubstantiation and to 
the arrival of "real presences." 

Within this genre the two monographs we have quoted are perhaps 
i hose in which the secret teachings of sexual magic with initiatic pur- 
poses have been expounded with a minimum of veils. 

The "Light of Sex" and the "Law ofTelema" 

We shall now provide two further references. Some writings pub- 
lished by Maria de Naglowska in the period between the two world 
wars arc somewhat spurious. Although personal speculation, rambling 
likTury expressiveness, and a deliberate intention to scandalize the 
ivuiIlt ihroiigh unnecessarily dwelling on Satanism play a role, yet 
we find I races ol 1 hemes regarding secrel teachings from contacts she 
I nude with some Russian Caucasian circles and perhaps also with 
I lasidic groups. We litid line a similar eouu pliou ol ;i cyclic develop- 



262 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



mem , symbolized by the "cosmic clock*' and its course. The first phase 
is the entry of God into nature, of the "Son" into the process of 
becoming, and of the male into female. It is the "woman," or Shakti, 
who predominates in this phase. At the figure six, which corresponds to 
the lowest point of the clock, that is, the descending arc, "in which 
woman dominates man and matter imprisons the spirit in the depths of 
its entrails," we have the limits of the abyss; when we reach this limit, 
we either die or are reborn to everlasting life. It is the point of the 
"dangerous passage" or turning point where the great trial is held. 121 
After that, themes of sexual magic appear because the trial should also 
consist in facing the woman in the same spirit as the Tantric principle of 
"victory over the bad through its transformation into the good." 122 The 
woman is thought of as the gate through which it is possible to enter into 
the sphere of death or life. In the fall, sensual pleasure "became the 
magnet that draws man toward woman, not for the conquest of life 
(which equals God), but for the conquest of death (which equals Satan), 
and Eve . . . became the battle field of the struggle between life and 
death." 123 At the decisive point of this trial, man sees his "bride" again 
and is invited to immerse himself in her, the female, once more, not in 
order to enter into the realm of death and becoming, but in order to 
leave that realm and maintain awareness of his own being instead of 
dissolving. In this context the woman is presented as the I anna Coeli y or 
Gateway to Heaven, and as the essential instrument for freedom. From 
the end of the descending phase (six), the victorious male next finds 
himself reprojected to the starting point of the cosmic clock's cycle, 
freed from matter and consecrated King. This is the rite of the "second 
wedding," which coincides with that of the formation of the Messiah, '^ 
We are dealing here not with mere abstract symbols but rather with 
their arousal within the framework of actual sexual procedures. As 
regards the technical side of these procedures, once more we find the 
prohibition against emission of the seed in coitus, Naglowska dis- 
tinguished two operations, and the first is indeed characterized by this 
procedure. "He who goes through the trial must remain dry until the 
end, for it is written, 4 Do not let your holy force be crystallized in a 
deadly liquid/ " Mention is made of "a danger of death [most likely not 
physical] in the case of failure." She adds that in this first phase "the 
woman is offered without knowledge for the diabolical operation," 125 
Leaving aside the "diabolical," it seems that the end pursued here 
remains essentially the same as that of Taoism, namely a preliminary 
"strengthening of the yang" inasmuch as the dissolving amalgamation 
with the woman is linked to a further rite, a successive and separate 
phase or initiation. In this second operation the man "sacrifices himself 
and accepts throughout the whole of his being, from top to NjUoiii, [lie 
fulminating penetration of (he dazzling woman at the sublime moment 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



263 



of holy coitus, and dterefore (unlike what happens in the first rite) the 
woman will remain awake. The man leaves this trial shaken in his 
reason and is then the sublime madman of the secret doctrines. Then he 
recovers his balance and becomes a new man." 126 If we are to make 
sense of this, the sleeping or wide-awake being of the woman in the two 
successive operations should perhaps be understood not in a literal 
sense but as referring to whether or not the "naked Diana," the 
transcendent woman, is aroused in her; and the "being shaken in his 
reason" might be the same as the "killing of the manaf in yoga. 
Naglowska does not discuss the details of this second rite with the 
awakened woman. Her premise that in the act of life of the second rite 
"the vibrations should not give the woman a localized pleasure because 
pleasure belongs to the man and not to the woman" is both banal and 
inverted, for according to authentic traditional sources, it is rather the 
man who should avoid this localization of the feeling, since his very 
constitution makes him much more prone to it than the woman. It is he 
who must be careful not to yield to desire for bodily pleasure. Perhaps 
what is said about "mystical pleasure" is more fitting: "Imagine a caress 
without any contact, a warmth that has nothing of the flesh about it, a 
multiple kiss that is not placed on any part." 127 Everything else in the 
book is confused and set forth within the fantastic picture of the rite of 
"initiatory hanging" which one must undergo before passing on to the 
second operation where the woman is awake. In this regard Naglowska 
wrote, "Only he who has surpassed the rite can usefully be united to an 
adequately trained woman because, knowing the unspeakable 
happiness of satanic pleasure, he cannot drown himself in the flesh of a 
woman, and if he performs the rite of the earth with his wife, he will do 
so u> enrich himself and not to lessen himself" 128 Even though it may 
not seem so, there is something more here than mere fantasy (quite 
apart from die inevitable "satanic," which is absolutely out of place 
here). We might think of an equivalent operation that seems to have 
been practiced in certain Japanese Zen schools, in which the trauma of a 
sctniasphyxia acts as a means to stretch the limits of conditioned 
awareness under a given circumstance. If the possession of a principle 
that in its own way is extranatural (like that which is normally received 
through initiation) is ensured, the risks of failure of the sexual practice 
tire minimized. Perhaps it is also possible to establish a relationship 
between the "satanic pleasure" mentioned and the ecstatic pleasure, or 
stifnifa sttkhtu of Tantrism. This experience hinders the appearance of 
it it- normal paroxysmal form of bodily pleasure. But all of this might 
niilv be a fanciful description ol the rite. B. And Kham has indicated 
that some journalists attended a ceremony in Paris in which some girls 
intended lor use in the "satanic operation" were consecrated, which 
khmv the pi:u in :il applu alioti of Naj'.lowska's teachings. 



264 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



The other source we referred to concerns the Englishman Aleister 
Crowley, who died in 1947 after a very troubled and adventurous 
existence. Mystification and an ostentatious Satanism played an even 
greater part in his behavior than in Naglowska's. (Crowley liked to be 
called the Great Beast 666.) We have evidence of several people not 
easily influenced that the man possessed a real force. It is hard to 
establish to what extent certain results he produced were due to 
objective procedures or how far those results may have had as their 
fundamentai condition the special and very personal constitution and 
force of Crowley. 

Crowley made a collection of "initiations"; he may have had 
authentic contacts with a kind of Arabic yogi, Soliman ben Aifha, and 
with two Hindu exponents of the Tan trie Way of the Left Hand, Brima 
Sen Pratab and Sri Agamy a Paramhamsa. 130 Apart from satanic, 
"heathen,** and deliberately scandalizing elements, the so-called Law of 
the Telema that Crowley espoused was in fact inspired by Tantrism. 

Its password was "Love is the Law, love under will.* 5 "Love*' here 
meant sexual love essentially, and the aim was to discover one's own 
true nature through special erotic experiences, 131 A religion of 
happiness and pleasure was sketched out to which was added a higher 
idea of death, as a trial and initiation. 132 The "love-death" complex is 
presented again according to values proper to the path of magical 
Venus* Crowley also spoke of poisons to be transformed into 
nourishment; he directed men to seek those things which were 
poisons for them, even very strong poisons, in order to assimilate 
them through love, with the aim of destroying the "complexes" 
(most likely, the conditional qualities) of their own nature. 134 In 
general, the purpose was to overcome the tension of the Dyad by the 
marriage of opposites and to integrate one's own nature continuously 
by means of "new mates" on every plane of being. (This is 
reminiscent of the hyperphy steal unions mentioned by Paracelsus 
and Kremmerz.) H Crowley wrote that we take different and 
opposed things and compel them to unite in one single thing; 
participation in this union is ecstatic because the lower element is 
dissolved in the higher. Every union should be intended to dissolve a 
more material complex and to create a more sublimated one; and this 
is the way of love, which rises from ecstasy to ecstasy. 136 Crowley's 
principle that the greater the polarity, the more savage the force of 
the magnetism and the quantity of energy freed through coitus, 
seems to have a specific application in the use of sex, for in the same 
passage he mentions the negative condition constituted by becoming 
accustomed to a particular woman. 137 

Crowley indicated both women and drugs as the means to cause 
openings or breakages of ordinary consciousness and to enter into 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



265 



real or evocatory relationships with supersensual beings. Symonds, 
Crowley's biographer, wrote, "Sex became for him the means to 
reach God. It was his vehicle of consecration. . . . He carried out the 
sexual act not to obtain emotional relief nor for procreative ends, but 
to start a new current, to renew his force. ... In his eyes every sex- 
ual act was a sacred magical act, a sacrament. A prolonged orgy in 
honor of the great god Pan. All in due order and proportion, very 
admirable." "Opus" was the word Crowley used for the sexual act, 
referring to the Hermetic idea of the "Great Opera," of which he 
made that act a part. At the peak of this "Opus," or erotic experience, 
by attaining to the rupture of level, he sometimes found himself face 
to face with the gods. "Operation prolonged and intense; orgasm 
multiple . . . the Gods clearly visualized and alive." 

The rituals of sexual magic were among the most secret of the Ordo 
Templi Orientis (OTO) organization of which Crowley was a head. 
They are described in a manuscript entitled "Agape. Liber C: The 
Book of the Sangraal," which we have been unable to obtain, so we 
cannot ascertain whether there was a likeness between the Tannic 
techniques and Crowley's teachings and experience. The system of 
Tantric aropa, evocation of real supersensual presences, seems how- 
ever, to have been part of it. In fact, we read, "She knows and loves 
God in me, not the man; therefore she has conquered the great enemy 
which hides behind its cloud of toxic gas, illusion" (the illusion of in- 
dividual identity). In his turn, for Crowley this was a question oi un- 
derstanding what lives behind the mortal and physical appearances 
of woman and of reaching a great Goddess, strange, perverse, hun- 
gry, and implacable. He said that it was to possess this Goddess that 
he used one woman or another. 139 What he said about every woman 
having her own particular zone of sensitivity on which it is necessary 
to concentrate may be technically of value, for, said Crowley, our 
only duty and pleasure must be to prolong it; we should not pay any 
attention if the woman asks for mercy, and we must repress any 
struggling firmly but gently; above all we should remember that, if 
she is capable of moving a limb afterward for some hours, she will 
despise us. However, he specified that all brutality must be avoided 
unless the woman herself, being a vulgar type, should desire it. But 
even I hen the brutality should be apparent rather than actual. l4( 

li is problematical that, on the one hand, Crowley had children 
while, on the other hand, he spoke of sex-magic in a homosexual con- 
lexi. w ' < Rowley claimed that in fertilizing his female companions he 
had not ncted as an inilitate; otherwise there would be an obvious 
tnnnasi with i lie system of initiatory coitus, which exclude a 
plot ie:ilive outcome. The suspicion arises thai Crowley's 
homosexual sex iniij'.u was not so mm h a real let Imique but i at her 



266 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



due to an inborn personal disposition, by means of which the orgasm 
of coitus (as also the effect of drugs) led to openings in consciousness 
toward the supersensual. Then something similar, an exceptional, 
personal^ psychic predisposition, must be presupposed in his female 
companions. Even a use of these companions as lucid and powerful 
mediums, which reminds us of practices found in Cagliostro and 
Kremmerz, seems to have been considered; indeed, mention is made 
of women in whom an almost frenzied erotic condition gave way, all 
of a sudden and without any apparent sign, to a deep calm that was 
hard to distinguish from a prophetic trance, in which they began to 
describe their visions. 142 

But the technique most often mentioned was that of excess; 
through pain or pleasure, sex or intoxication, it was necessary to 
attain a condition of exhaustion taken to the extreme limit 
compatible with survival. i43 The magical dagger, used together with 
all the traditional paraphernalia (signs, invocatory formulas, 
pentacles, cloaks, and so on), symbolized the readiness to sacrifice 
all. 144 In the secret ritual of the OTO, called De arte magica y we find 
in article XV a reference to a "death in orgasm," called morsjusti. 145 
The limit of exhaustion or frenzy and intoxication is also indicated as 
the moment of magical clear-headedness, of powerful trance in man 
or woman. 

The idea that the magic of sex, if it is not to lead to ruin and perdi- 
tion, presupposes a special strengthening of the will and a practice of 
asceticism of a suitable kind was acknowledged by Crowley, who said 
that he had faced everything, even the things most repugnant to his 
own nature, and had challenged the power of drugs that could have 
altered the fate of his own life and had a severe effect on his body. He 
had dominated every habit of his spirit and set himself a code of 
ethics more strict than any other in the world, although he possessed 
absolute freedom in respect of every code of conduct, 146 But even 
though Crowley ended his life at seventy- two with all his faculties 
intact, yet we hear of others he had contact with, particularly women, 
who ended in mental institutions or were driven to killing 
themselves; and this confirms what secret tradition has taught of the 
dangers of the Left Hand path. 

Especially through the use of drugs (but we might say that the 
same applies to his use of women) Crowley saw, however, the danger 
of creating addiction. He said that drugs should only be the food of 
"strong and royal men." 147 But there remains the possibility that. 
such men cannot deprive themselves of that food; even if we use 
drugs as a means to attain contacts with the supersensual-, the 
bondage of the addict can still occur.' 48 The fact thai ilie el In is of 
drugs on Crowley, and perhaps on some of his followers, were most 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



267 



L 



likely the same as those of the "holy potions" of ancient times or of 
the mixtures used in the experiences of the Sabbat was due not only 
to the ritual fact and a possible link with some surviving initiatory 
chain but also to his special personal constitution. 

The Presuppositions of Operative Sexual Magic 

It remains only to say something about sexual magic in a proper or 
operative sense, namely the ability to act on other people or on one's 
surroundings on other bases than physical laws and material or psy- 
chological determinisms. Here we shall leave unanswered the ques- 
tion whether such an ability is real or not. We shall only examine the 
presuppositions that exist in the idea that so many people have 
acknowledged the reality of that ability when the techniques used are 
based on sex. 

From the metaphysical point of view, if it is true that the mystery 
of the Three or the reintegration of the single being in the way condi- 
tioned by the Dyad tends to be fulfilled through eros, then it requires 
only one step further to the theory of magical power. What paralyzes 
man in this regard is his split existentialism. The separation of the 
sexes is a special method of manifestation of the Dyad principle, 
which also conditions the division between spirit and nature, ego and 
nonego. If there exists a metaphysical relationship or coinci- 
dence — and we have seen how Scotus Eriugena also recognized 
ji — then there may equally well be a relationship between the 
experience of transcendence through sex and a nondual state that 
permits a direct and extranormal action on the nonego, on the outer 
web of events. Let us recall that in the classical and Platonic version 
of the myth of the original hermaphrodite, a power such that it struck 
fear into the gods was attributed to that being before it was split. 

That is the position from the metaphysical point of view. From the 
psychic point of view, the traditions of magic agree that every effec- 
livc action in extranormal terms has as its premise a state of exalta- 
tion, of "mania," of active ecstasy or intoxication that releases the 
imagination from its physical conditional bonds and brings the ego 
into contact with Paracelsus' "Light of Nature/ 1 the psychic 
substratum of reality where every image or word formed should 
acquire an objective power. Now, if eros leads in a natural way to 
such n slate of exaltation, we can understand the move from mystical 
in initiatory sexual excitement to magical sexual excitement. The 
ability of eros to produce exceptional power or vitality in the 
iiuiiginalioLi is well known even in the profane sphere, as we said 
enrlicr. /V "living magical fantasy" is active in all love in a certain way 
and in a ccrlain degree; and so we should not be surprised thai a 
p.ulu ulat maj'ii :i1 levhnique lias employed sex as lis means. 



268 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Existing documents relating to this subject are scarce. Degraded 
forms or forms belonging to witchcraft, such as found among primi- 
tive peoples, are not of much interest here. Some general references 
can be found in Hindu Tantrism. Here it is a matter of the chakra or 
chains (literally, wheels) consisting of couples who perform ritual 
coitus together in a circular formation. In the middle of the circle is 
the "lord of the wheel" or chakreskvara together with his companion, 
who officiates and directs the collective operation. An adept who has 
had a perfect initiation is needed to perform this function. Overall, 
this is a collective and partly orgiastic evocation of the Goddess as the 
latent force in the group, a force now 7 aroused through the realization 
of acts and visualization of images by the individual pairs until a 
fiuidic or "psychic" vortex is created and used in the operation. A 
similar method performed for the benefit of others is used in 
professional magic rites. Tantric chakra have been convened by 
princes for special profane purposes, such as propitiation of success 

149 

in w T ar. 

We have no details about the sexual procedure followed in such 
contexts. Therefore, we do not know whether coitus took its natural 
course here as in promiscuous orgiastic rites, or whether the practice 
of retention was followed as in initiatory rites. A third possibility is 
that only the leader of the chain fulfilled the important operations 
w T ith the woman reserved for him, as was the case in operations of 
collective magic in general. 

Something furl her about the inner conditions of sexual magic can 
be inferred from practices of the same type that have gone on even in 
modern times and our own civilization. In this regard, an indicative 
document is the book Magia sexuatis by Paschal Beverly Ran- 
dolph, Randolph w T as an enigmatic figure, a writer and occultist of 
the late nineteenth century. He first joined the Hermetic Brother- 
hood of Luxor, an initiatory organization with its headquarters in 
Boston; in about 1870 he set up his own center, which he called the 
Eulis Brotherhood. The book mentioned above appears to have been 
written after his death, and based on personal notes of those belong- 
ing to the center. 

Randolph began by acknowledging that sex is the main and 
greatest magical force in nature. And when he said that "all force and 
powers arise from the womanhood of God," 1 "* 1 we meet again in him 
the well-known metaphysical theory of the Shakti. One particular 
teaching concerns the inverted polarity of the two sexes; man and 
woman respectively constitute the positive and negative pole on the 
material and bodily plane, but "on the mental piane^ woman is t In- 
active and man the negative pole." It was also specified that, if man's 
sex organ is positive and woman's is negative, the opposite is I he case 






L 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 269 

with the "organ of mental manifestations" located in the head. 1 " 
This agrees with De Guaita, but in Randolph's case the teaching was 
rather distorted and should be related to what we said about the 
passivity or negative polarization proper to man when he finds 
himself in a state of strong desire, and about the positive nature of 
woman where her natural subtle, attractive, mighty, and 
"nonactive" pow r er is under consideration. Bearing this in mind, in a 
book already cited 133 the inversion of polarity and the establishment 
of a positive polarization in man with respect to woman on the 
spiritual and subtle plane were indicated as an indispensable 
presupposition for initiatory coitus. To talk of the head as the organ 
of "mental manifestations," as Randolph did, recalls the jargon of 
psychology. It is in no way true that man is polarized negatively or 
woman positively and actively; rather the opposite is true. The 
inversion and positivization mentioned as regards male negative 
polarity (a mutation that we have already linked to the symbolism of 
the inverted coitus) concern deeper layers of being: they are the same 
in Far Eastern terms as the laying open of the pure yang> and it is 
necessary to arrive at this stage if one is to realize in its occult sense 
the precept "Non des mulieri pates tatem animae tuae" (Give not power 
over your soul to a woman) at the point when her body is being 
possessed. Although Randolph did not speak of this condition, the 
qualities that he declared necessary for sexual magic imply it. 

The first of such qualities is called volancie (exercise of the will) in 
French and is linked to the ability to control oneself under any cir- 
cumstances, to "will" in a steadfast and constant way. According to 
Randolph, "an analogy can be found in the irresistible force of light- 
ning, which breaks and burns but does not tire." "A disciple should 
develop in himself this elementary force, volancie, which is passive, 
because it obeys the command of the mind, and is cold because it is 
free from every passion.' 

The second quality, which acts as a positive counterpart, is 
"decretism," the "dictatorial quality or positive power of mankind 
without which no true good or evil can be done," "the ability to give 
peremptory orders (beginning with oneself) calmly and confidently 
without nursing any doubts about the attainment of the desired 
died." We have already seen that in Indo-Tibctan Tantrism the 
mule principle is referred to as the vajra y a word that also means 
scepter. To exercise this faculty, "the imagination must be free of 
every iMhcr preoccupation and no emotion should affect the given 
order. 

The ihird requisite ability is "posi&m," which consists ol attitudes, 
I'.rstinvs, or postures ol 1 ht- body ihal are embodiments, plastic ex- 
|iirv.iuns, ni sij'ie; ol :i j'iveii I In nir.lu , Apart fn.nn ihr inveiilion ol 



270 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic 



271 



words and certain exaggerations, we are here dealing with what, in 
general j forms the foundation of ritual and what the yoga doctrine ex- 
presses in the asana and mudra s special postures of body and limbs 
that possess a symbolic value. They also act as a closure of circuits for 
some currents of subtle energy in the organism. The premise is that 
the "posed" gesture is "realized" or lived in its significance, like an 
incipient assumption of a concrete form of the latter. 

This eventually leads to a quality that Randolph named "tiroeler- 
ism": the power to evoke and formulate clear, steady images with the 
inner sight. 

We shall not dwell in detail on the magic of scents, sounds, and 
colors with their astrological correspondences, which Randolph 
provides without citing his sources. Randolph lists the following 
aims that can be pursued with sex-magic operations: ( 1) realization of 
a project, desire, or precise order; (2) provocation of supcrsensual 
visions (as in some of the operations in which Crowley took part); (3) 
regeneration of vital energy and strengthening of "magnetic power'* 
(which could correspond to one of the purposes of Taoist practices); 
(4) production of an influence to subject a woman to a man or a man 
to a woman; (5) liberation of "charges" of psychic and fluidic force to 
saturate certain objects. 

He gives few details about the methods of sexual union to pursue 
these purposes, and the little information we do find is not at all con* 
vincing. We are told that "lust and pleasure should not be the main 
object." 157 However, it is hard to imagine how in such a context it is 
possible to seek, beyond pleasure, the "union of souls," insofar as a 
concrete purpose is pursued in which the woman is used as an instru- 
ment. At best, we think there could be a fluidic amalgamation. He 
speaks of coitus as a "prayer" whose object is clearly formulated and 
imagined; but if volancie and decretisnV 58 are activated, the choice of 
the word "prayer" seems strange to us. Besides this, it would seem 
decisive in coitus that one should "plunge in" and feel oneself carried 
on high "at the moment when, with all the forces united, one touches 
the root of the opposite sex." At this point, the magical act should be 
introduced. "It is best if the man and woman imagine the same object 
or desire the same thing, but the prayer of only one of the two is 
effective just the same, because in the spasm of love it transports the 
creative power of the other." For the "prayer" to be effective, "the 
paroxysm of both is necessary. It is also necessary that the woman's 
orgasm should coincide with the man's emission, for only in this way 
will the magic be fulfilled." 159 There is explicit mention of the 
moment "when the man's seed passes into the woman's body and is 
accepted by her." Even if one guards against the occurrence, a I ihul 
moment, of "carnal passion," of "bestial inslineu" which is almost 



"suicide for the man," stilly these last instructions are in contrast 
with most of the genuine esoteric teachings we have referred to 
earlier. As we have seen, in those teachings, emission during sexual 
orgasm is deemed an interruption of the sensual possibilities and a 
hazardous yielding. 

To accept as genuine Randolph's instructions, we must assume the 
possibility that the magic force of the seed, the virya, can be separat- 
ed from its physical substance. After the force has been aroused 
through the woman's embrace, the insertion of will at the liminal 
point of orgasm would lead to the separation, to the release and vibra- 
tion of the magical male force at the level of the preestablished opera- 
tion; the seed emitted into the woman and held by her flesh would 
then be only a lifeless substance, devoid of its hyperbiological coun- 
terpart. In essence, the power to create would be diverted from the 
sacred plane of generation (as in ritual assumptions of the procreative 
conjugal act, which are known to creationist religions, such as Islam) 
toward a magical plane at the very point when the unhindered, bio- 
logical, ejaculative determinism occurs. Furthermore, we might 
think of the extreme dynamic and vitalizing power that the imagina- 
tion could have at such a moment if a man were to remain aware of 
himself and able to make use of it. Only thus is Randolph's system of 
coitus understandable. Moreover, the state of union and simultane- 
ous erotic crisis in the man and woman can perhaps be interpreted in 
i lie sense of a creative state rather than on the physical lack of com- 
mon sexual union. Indeed, we know that such a condition is not 
required for fecundation; a frigid or raped woman may be impreg- 
nated, and biology tells us that the fecundated penetration of the 
spermatozoon into the ovum can happen mechanically even many 
hours after the orgasm of the couple, not to mention through 
artificial insemination. 

Randolph outlines some special forms or positions in coitus to suit 
i lie specific purposes set by the magical operation; it is most likely 
hue that posism came into play* These remnants of ancient secret 
I radii ions surviving to our own day seem to confirm our hypothesis 
I hat originally certain coital positions mentioned in profane erotic 
liieraiure may have had a ritual or even magical significance. 

Operations of sexual magic require very special training and 
almost an internal separation because, on the one hand, there must 
he a process of dissolution and ecstatic amalgamation with the 
woman which engages the whole of one's being (this being the 
condition lor aiiainment of the nominal stale or rather the premise 
lor i he operation's effectiveness), and on (he other hand, a second 
vp,u milisI hi* present and alcr! which is occupied willl entirely 
dllfiTcnl things and lixi'il on I he imnj'.e corresponding lo ihc purpose 



.. 



272 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



and object of the "magical prayer." 

Randolph prescribes a period of seven days' preparation for some 
purposes, and this period was to be followed by an operative period 
of forty days, during which the rite was performed every three 
days. 161 Suitable surroundings had to be prepared. The woman had 
to sleep in her own room; she was only to be seen when a state of 
magnetic vibration was aroused in both partners. After each 
operation the woman should depart without speaking, which 
emphasizes her merely instrumental part. 

To conclude, Randolph warns against "incubi and succubi, which 
reflect your vices and hidden desires"; for it is possible to be irrevo- 
cably enslaved by them. 162 We found a similar warning in 
Kremmerz, and we have heard others speak of "tacitly established 
pacts." The greater danger, however, has no real relationship to 
"vices and desires"; rather, it concerns the inherent danger when the 
elementary force of sex is stripped bare and objectified in one or 
another of its polarizations. Passivity in the participant entails the 
possibility of obsession and the destruction of his own personality or 
"soul" in an almost theological sense, for here states of being are 
entered into or aroused which are much deeper than those 
experienced when a man "goes mad" about a woman in profane love 
(or a woman about a man) and goes forth to his ruin or death for her 
(or him). 




Conclusion 



Sex is the "greatest magical force in nature"; an impulse acts in it 
which suggests the mystery of the One, even when almost everything 
in the relationship between man and woman deteriorates into animal 
embraces and is exhausted and dispersed in a faded idealizing senti- 
mentality or in the habitual routine of socially acceptable conjugal re- 
lations. The metaphysics of sex survives in the very cases where, in 
looking at wretched mankind and the vulgarity of infinite lovers of 
infinite races — endless masks and individuations of the Absolute 
Man seeking the Absolute Woman in a turn of the circle of animal 
generation— it is hard to overcome a feeling of disgust and revolt and 
the temptation to accept the biological and physical theory which 
says that human sexuality springs from the life of instincts and mere 
animality. However, if any reflection of a transcendence actually ex- 
perienced unintentionally takes form in ordinary existence, it does so 
through sex and, in the case of the common man, through sex alone. 
Not those who busy themselves with speculations, with social or 
"spiritual" intellectual activities, but only those who raise themselves 
as high as heroic or ascetic experience, go further into the beyond. 
But for ordinary mankind it is sex alone which, even if only in the 
rapture, illusion, or obscure trauma of an instant, leads to some 
opening through and beyond the conditionalities of merely 
individual existence. This is the true foundation of the importance 
that Jove and sex have and will always have in human life, an 
importance unmatched by any other impulse. 

With those words we can end this investigation. We are well aware 
of iis defects, particularly as regards the phenomenology of normal 
and "abnormal" profane sexual love, about which only a suitably 
oriented specialist — a psychiatrist, neurologist, or gynecologist 

could have gathered richer material to corroborate many things 
I luil we have only been able to mention briefly in these pages. Never- 
llicless, we believe that the main purpose we set for ourselves has 
heen achieved, thai is> lo give the sense of the whole, including the 
metaphysical and hypeiphysieal dimensions within which is intc- 
14 ruled everything normally known as love and sex when I heir mosl 
profound aspect is inranl. 

To reach such a point we have also had lo )\o I or ward inlo two un 



274 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



Conclusion 



275 



usual fields, that of liminal experiences that many people will be 
tempted to exclude from the "sane" and "normal" course of every 
erotic experience, and that of secret teachings, myths, and traditions 
of the cults and rites of civilizations far from us in space or time. It is 
only from this whole that we have been able to gather the elements 
needed to explain a part by the whole and to draw from the higher the 
key for understanding the lower. Thus the consideration of those two 
fields, and especially of the second, has played an important part 
within the limits of our work, and we have advanced into them with- 
out worrying about any impression of strangeness or perhaps even of 
extravagance and eccentricity which a given type of reader may have 
sustained from them. 

In actual fact, on the subject of that which presents an apparently 
"abnormal" character, wc criticized in the Introduction of this book 
the mistake of deeming the "normal" to be that which we find in most 
cases. Instead, we believe to be "normal" in the strictest sense of the 
word that which is typical, and that has nothing to do with quantity 
or great frequency of occurrence* because the true norm is generally 
met with very seldom. In this same sense, a fully healthy and well- 
shaped man who has all the morphological features of the ideal type is 
empirically an exceptional apparition, but is not for that reason "ab- 
normal"; instead, he is the very person to give evidence of normality. 
The same idea is true for aspects of eros, love, and sexuality, which, 
even when they are thought to be possible, will nowadays seem to 
most people abnormal and exceptional and therefore such that in 
practice they should not be taken into account. Besides, in a consid- 
eration of a higher category, the criteria may be inverted; the abnor- 
mal (the typical) is the normal, while the normal (which we usually 
find in most cases) is the abnormal. 

This consideration is particularly applicable when the universally 
diffused forms of the sexuality of today are compared with different 
horizons resulting from the study of other Times and other civiliza- 
tions. Modem man is inclined to think that his own civilization is 
normal, or rather that the behavior by which this civilization is most 
characterized is normal. He rarely doubts that every other civiliza- 
tion and every different form that may have existed in the past should 
be measured at the level of that which is familiar to him. He stays 
with this queer infatuation, and therefore his idea concerning the 
idea will be "normal" and the "real" in sex will be distorted and 
maimed as well. Indeed, as in every sphere of spiritual interest, so loo 
in that of sex and love, almost everything which in our times and in 
the modern age in general has importance shows a regressive 
character . To the modern "devilry of sex" which we mentioned in ihe 
Inn oducl ion I here correspond, in general, forms of a sen sua lily 




made primitive, or bordering on neurosis and the most banal 
depravity. The outcome is the level of the serological, erotic, or 
crypto-pornographic literature of our times, and innumerable works 
intended to vulgarize and give guidance in sexual life. Now, the 
displacement and broadening of outlook, to which we sought to 
contribute in our other works dealing with other subjects, were the 
aim of this present investigation in one of its main aspects and 
specifically with regard to the field of eras and sex. Just as the 
traditional world and that part of it which has been preserved up to 
comparatively recent times in non- Western civilizations knew an 
image of man which, by not being restricted to materialism, 
"psychology," and physiology, was infinitely more complete than 
the modern image, so in the world, sex was considered integrally 
and was studied and aroused in its higher values and capabilities as 
well. And a real understanding of the forms to which sex is limited 
today arid, in general, of the forms available to the great majority of 
less differentiated human types, being forms that we may well call 
the by-products of sex, can be achieved only by recovering the 
categories, knowledge, and experience of that different world. 

These, therefore, are the perspectives that this treatise wishes to 
open up by simply proposing a broadening of knowledge. Our pur- 
pose here was to show that what we are accustomed to seeing and 
what, almost without exception, are to be found around us so often 
that they seem to be normal and evident are not the whole story, and 
that the present sexological theories, especially those influenced by 
evolutionistic biology or fixed psychoanalytical ideas, do not even 
touch upon the most important matters. It would already be a great 
step forward if the mention of the metaphysics of sex no longer 
seemed to a reader to be eccentric. Moreover, various things we have 
said could be of service to a more highly qualified and differentiated 
person in clearing up his own experiences and problems. Concerning 
the sphere of the sexual sacrum and everything that we examined, 
particularly in the last chapter relating to secret teachings, the benefit 
will perhaps be the idea that a like category of things has its own pos- 
?ability, as witnessed in traditions that often go back over several 
hundred years and are in agreement with each other. Although we 
have cited instances of prolongations of such traditions down to our 
own times, almost all of our contemporaries will be unable to do 
an vi I ling more than just note the fact; and perhaps the same is true 
for die holder areas of profane eros itself, on which we have often 
dwell. M:m now is different, our environment is different, and in 
practice we can only con m on exceptional cases. However, as we said 
11 l lie licgiiminj* when we repeated whal we had written on various 
oilier nt va\ioii-» :tiul in oilier contexts about ihe purpose ol making 






276 



The Metaphysics of Sex 



known one or another side of the nonmodern concept of life and of 
the corresponding behavior, it is quite an achievement just to have an 
idea of the size of the gap involved so that we can understand where 
we have arrived today. With regard also to sex, the rediscovery of its 
primary and deepest meaning and the employment of its highest 
capabilities depend on the possibility of the reintegration of modern 
man and on his arising once more and betaking himself beyond the 
psychic and spiritual lowlands into which he has been led by the 
mirages of his material civilization, for in this lowlands the meaning 
of being truly a man or woman is doomed to vanish. Sex will only 
serve to Lake him still further downward; furthermore, even apart 
from what concerns the masses, sex, being reduced to its content of 
mere sensation, will only be the misleading, obscure, and desperate 
alleviation of the existential disgust and anguish of him who has 
stumbled into a blind alley. 


Symbol of the Eagle has a distinct traditional character. Being present in the myths and symbols of all traditional civilizations, the 
eagle represents the most complete manner unchanging and immutable meaning that lies beyond the range of values and the 
names given to him by the various races. Next, we specify that in the tradition of the Aryans eagle symbol corresponds to the 
"Olympic" and the heroic character. That's what we try to show by reference to relevant aspects of the tradition. 









"Olympic" nature of the symbol of an eagle is directly connected with the dedication of this bird Olympic god par excellence2 - 
Zeus, the embodiment of divine light and royal dignity in ario-Greeks (like Jupiter ario-Romantsev). Besides the eagle, Zeus 
honored with another symbol - lightning. We have no right to overlook this element because, as will be seen later, lightning often 
complements the character of an eagle. It is also worth recalling that according to ancient notions of the Aryan world, the definition 
of "Olympic" element can be given, contrasting his titanic, telluric and prometeicheskim forces. Moreover, it was lightning, according 
to myth, Zeus struck the Titans. In ancient times the Aryans, who perceive any battle as a reflection of a metaphysical battle 
between the Olympic and the titanic forces (including themselves while the troops of the former), we find the eagle and lightning, as 
the symbols corresponding to such an outlook. Today, however, their deep meaning almost completely forgotten. 





According to ancient ideas about Aryans life, immortality is a privilege: it is not just life after death, but heroic and effective stay in 
that state of consciousness, which corresponds to the Olympic divinity. Revealed some parallels. A similar concept of immortality, 
we meet in the tradition of ancient Egypt. Only parts of the human being ugotovlena eternal heaven-life in glory - is Ba, depicted in 
the hieroglyph of an eagle or a falcon (falcon due to natural conditions in Egypt replaces the eagle, as the closest substitute, offered 
by a physical reality to express the same idea.) It is in the form of a falcon transformed the soul of the deceased appears in the 
ritual described in the "Book of the Dead" 3. It frightens the gods, uttering the following solemn words: "I am crowned as the Divine 
Falcon, and now I can go to the Land of the Dead, and seize the kingdom of Osiris ..." This is a super-earthly inheritance is identical 
with the Olympic element. Indeed, in the Egyptian myth of Osiris - a divine figure, corresponding to the original 'solar' state of mind, 
which has undergone alteration and destruction (death and dismemberment of Osiris), resurrected by Horus. The deceased, an 
introduction to the resurrection power of Horus, Osiris immortality, leading to a "revival" or "reconstruction." 





Simply identify the numerous correspondences between their traditions and symbols. In the Hellenic myth says that creatures such 
as Ganymede, carried and accompanied by a "eagles" to the throne of Zeus at Olympus. In the tradition of ancient Persia, King 
Kai-Cavus is trying, like Prometheus, climb up to heaven by an eagle. In the Indo-Aryan tradition, namely the eagle brings magic 
drink, which again makes Indra the lord of the gods. Classical Tradition adds interesting detail: according to it (even if it's even 
unscientific) Eagle is the only representative of the animal world, able to look at the sun without taking glaz4. 




All this explains the role of an eagle in some versions of the legend of Prometheus. While maintaining its "titanic" nature, 
Prometheus is not ready for the attainment of the Olympic flame, and he wants to make this fire is not the property of the "gods", 
but people. In expiation of guilt, in these versions of the legend of Prometheus chained liver is constantly tormented by an eagle. 
This sacred bird of the Olympic god associated with lightning, which strikes the Titans, here is the equivalent of that same fire that 
would set Prometheus. Thus, we are talking about a special kind of eternal torment. Prometheus does not have the nature of the 
Eagle, "Olympian" beholding the light of the Absolute, the strength with which he wanted to learn, becomes the cause of his 
torment and punishment. It helps to understand the inner tragedy of some modern representatives of the doctrine of "titanic 
superman" and the victims were possessed of the same ideas - from Nietzsche to Dostoevsky. In particular as it concerns the 
characters of the last books. 






Returning to the world of Aryan mythology, we find in the ancient Indian tradition, one of the variations of the myth of Prometheus. 
Agni in the form of an eagle or hawk plucks the fruit with the world tree, repeating the act in this way Semitic Adam, intending to 
"become like gods." Agni, who is also a personification of fire, shall be punished for his deed. His feather falls to the ground and it 
grows from the plant from which later would produce "Earth soma." Soma, the equivalent of ambrosia in India is a symbolic 
substance, which allows to find "Olympic" state. The Aryan myth in its structure, although more complicated, is similar to the 
Egyptian myth (the dismemberment of Osiris, Horus his recovery). Here you can talk about the support act and suffering 
prometeicheskom subsequent "cleansing", which eventually becomes the embryo of the achievement of true purpose. 




In the tradition of the Aryan Persia eagle often becomes the embodiment of "glory" or Hvar (Farn), which, as we have noted, for the 
Aryan race was not just an abstraction, but the mystic power of the supreme and true power, descends upon the kings and rulers, 
involving them in the immortal nature and witness their victorious. This Aryan "glory", as embodied in the eagle does not tolerate 
deviations from the masculine ethic inherent Mazdaism. The myth tells us that it is in the form of an eagle the king of glory leaves 
Yimu when he defiles himself with lies. 







Based on these correspondences of symbols and their meaning becomes clear that in ancient Rome, an eagle carrying a definite 
symbolic load. The ritual of the Roman imperial apofeoza5 is direct and irrefutable testimony to the Romans "Olympic" ideal. In this 
ritual the flight of an eagle symbolized the transition of the soul of the deceased emperor in a state of "Godhead." We recall the 
details of the ceremony, according to the original codified ritual conducted after the death of the Emperor Augustus. 





The body of the deceased emperor was placed in a coffin covered with purple, put on a palanquin of ivory and gold. Then the coffin 
was put up on the funeral pyre surrounded by priests, spread out on the Champ de Mars, and the rite decursing. Once the fire 
ignited, flames flew between the eagle, which is symbolically indicated the flight of the soul of the deceased to the celestial spheres 
to be reunited with his family Olimpiytsev6. 





During decursing soldiers, aristocrats and military leaders, becoming the king around the fire, threw him awards received for 
service. The deep meaning of the ritual is this: arias (and Romans) believed that their leaders have a genuine victorious force, but 
not so much on a personal level, but as carriers of super-human, "the Olympic element" associated with them. So the Romans 
during the celebrations of the victory of the leader assumes the attributes of the god Jupiter, Olympic, and it was kept in his temple 
laurel wreath, so glorified the true winner, surpassing the human element. During decursing place "remission" 7 the above rite: the 
soldiers and commanders returned awards, testament to their bravery and courage, his emperor, the true bearer of the "Olympic" 
>ower, liberated and migrate to the divine plan. 



pow 




This brings us to the analysis of yet another evidence of the presence of the "Olympic" spirit in the Roman world, also associated 
with the symbol of an eagle. Traditionally it was assumed that the one who sat on an eagle, Zeus predugotovlyalsya to high 
purpose or royal power, and thus emphasized the "Olympic" the legitimacy of an eagle and his chosen one. In the classical (and 
particularly Roman) tradition also believed that the eagle is a harbinger of victory of the Aryans and the Romans, as the forces of 
Olympic gods, it was understood that the victory of the Aryan and the Romance of "race" are all-conquering power of Olympic deity, 
the god of light. The victory of the people reflected the victory of the Supreme Deity of the anti-Olympic, "the barbaric forces," and it 
was a harbinger of an eagle, a bird of Zeus. 






This allows a better understanding of the original sacred (and not merely allegorical) meaning of the symbol of an eagle depicted on 
the banners of imperial Rome, and signa vexilla8. Even in the era of the republic, Rome eagle was the symbol of the legions, and 
said that "every legion - the eagle, and no one without a legion eagle" 9. Banner supplemented Eagle with outstretched wings and 
lightning in its claws. Here again we encounter the "Olympic" symbols: a sign of the power of Jupiter is combined with the divine 
bird, is a lightning god conquers and destroys the Titans. 





It is necessary to emphasize the following detail: the eagle depicted on the banners of the barbarians. Among them we find the 
signa auxiliariumlO and sacred totem animals (such as a bull or ram), related to other influences. In consequence, these signs 
have penetrated into Roman world, joined with the eagle, often giving rise to a double symbolism: the legion now characterized the 
second beast that added to the eagle on the banners, while the eagle remained the symbol of Rome itself. In the imperial era 
military character often became an eagle symbol of the Imperium. 





We know about the role of the character of an eagle in the subsequent history of the northern and Germanic peoples. It may seem 
that the eagle left the Roman world for a long time and moved on to the German tribes, manifesting itself in the end, as a purely 
north-European character. It's not quite true. There seem to forget about the original origin of the symbol of the eagle, which is now 
the emblem of Germany, as once - the Austrian Empire, the last heir of the Holy Roman-Germanic Empire. The German eagle - is 
in fact a Roman eagle. It was Charlemagne in 800 AD, at the time of the proclamation renovatio romanii imperiil 1 restored the 
fundamental character of an eagle, making it the emblem of the state. 





listorically a symbol of the modern Reich - a modification of the Roman eagle. No doubt with a deeper, supra-historical point of 
view, one can assume something more than just borrowing. The eagle is present in the Nordic mythology as one of the sacred 
animals of Odin, Wotan, and the bird depicted on the banners of the Roman legions, often adorned helmets old Germanic leaders. 
Consequently, we can assume that Charlemagne took the eagle as a symbol of renewed empire, turned to ancient Rome and at 
the same time unconsciously revived the ancient symbol, ario-Nordic tradition, preserved in fragmentary form of semi-consciou: 



and the various peoples in the period of aggressive wars. Whatever it was, subsequently became the only attribute of the eagle 
heraldry, and his deep original meaning forgotten. 



. 




Like many ancient symbols, the eagle these days has become a symbol identified with a set of ideas. It would be absurd to assurm 
the existence of concepts, which we discussed above, in all cases when an eagle depicted on the flags and coats of arms in 
Europe. But for us, the heirs of the ancient Roman spirit, everything is different, as well as to another state, our present ally, which 
is the successor of the Holy Empire of the German nation. Knowledge of the initial value of the Aryan symbol of an eagle, the 
emblem of our country revived, would fill an exalted sense of our struggle. It would help to restore the original tradition of the 
ancient Aryan States, which saw themselves an army of the powers and acted, claiming the highest law and order forces, under the 
Olympic symbol, the Olympic awakening power, destructive to the dark titanic entities. 




1 First published in the newspaper "New Life» (Vita Nova) November 30, 1 941 , pp. 1 0-1 2 under the heading "Symbols of the Aryan 
tradition Eagle" - Comm. first. 





2 Par excellence (Fr.) - for the most part, mostly. Where: In the highest degree, the supreme. - Note, first. 





3 LXXVIII, 1-4, 46 Wallis-Budge translation. "The Book of the Dead" - Ancient traditions of other world famous with the 
millennium BC, since the Old Kingdom - Comm. first. 




4 Luciano, Icarom. (Lucian, "Ikaromenipp or flight Cloud»), XIV. 





5 Apoteosi (it.) - from the Greek. Apotheosis, ie "Deification." Here: Grand ceremony of farewell to the Emperor and his 
posthumous glorification. - Note, first. 




6 Dione Cassio (Dio Cassius' Roman History »), LVI, 34; Erodiano (Herodian," History of the Roman emperors »), IV, 2. 





Remissione (it.) - remission, from Lat. Remissio, ie "Reduction, relaxation." Where: The reverse process. - Note, first. 



7 Re 





8 Signa, vexilla (vexillum) (Latin) - Elements of the military paraphernalia of imperial Rome. Veksilla (hence the name of the science 
of flags - veksillologiya) - the banner of the Legion, Signa - a distinctive sign of the legion and cohorts, usually in the form of an 
animal (eagle, wild boar, a lion, the Minotaur, a horse, wolf, etc.), which was carried in front of troops on a long shaft. Based on 
these emblems of military units sometimes got their names. - Note, first. 






9 Cesare, Bell. Gall. (Caesar, "Notes on the Gallic War»), IV, 29; Tacito, Ann. (Tacitus, "Annals") I, 39; Hist. I, 61, 89, 100. 







,. 



Signa auxiliarium (Latin) - Protect characters. - Note, first. 





11 Renovatio romanii imperii (Latin) - Restoration of the Roman Empire. - Note, first. 







Appendix A. 

EAGLE, article from the encyclopedia, "Myths of the peoples of the world" 

(New York: "Soviet Encyclopedia", 1982) 




Eagle, eagle, symbol of the celestial (solar) power, light and immortality is one of the most common deified animals - symbols of the 
gods and their mythologies messenger in different nations. Typologically the earliest stage of the cult of OA is reflected in the 
mythologies, where OA serves as an independent character (originally, probably, - totemic origin). Evidence of the deification of O. 
as a special object of worship (Nasr, «OS-god"), known in ancient central and northern Arabia. Preservation of this habitat ancient 
Semitic (or even obschesemitskih) ideas can be traced by comparison with Ugaritic tradition of mifoepicheskim Danniilu and his son 
Akhate. Motif otlamyvaniya wings O. combines Ugaritic epics with drevnemesopotamskim, where the sacred lion-OA Anzu (Anzud) 
must overcome his struggle with the gods. 









In ancient Mesopotamia, O. had been a symbol of the deity of war Sumerian Ninurta (Ningirsu), in ancient Greece - Zeus (see 
image of Zeus in the form of OA in Crete), in Rome - Jupiter. The Finns, Samoyed peoples, Yakuts, Tungusic peoples and other 
peoples of Siberia, the cult was connected with O. view him as an assistant or a shaman impersonation (where normal image on O. 
shamanic clothing) and a cultural hero. One of the major feats of OA as a cultural hero in mythologies of Eurasia (especially 
Siberia) and North America is the kidnapping of their light or assistance provided to them in getting people to fire. The myth of 
Indians and mono yokutov O. coyote helps to raise high the stolen sun and hang it on the east. In Yakut O. associated with the 
legend of bringing them to the fire for some die-cutting ceremonies of healing ritual fire could only be performed by a man whose 
ancestor was O. 







Claude Levi-Strauss in the study of mythology Indians of North and South America, calls the myth of the main destroyer of nests O. 
According to this myth, the hero - a young man climbs a tree to destroy the nest, O., in the South American myths - macaw parrot 
(or another day bird of prey). When he stirred up chicks, O. enters into negotiations with the hero and offers him a means of making 
fire. In other embodiments, the same myth of the hero from the very beginning as a defender of children by O. Crow Indian myth, 
once lived a man who the boy, while playing, fell into the fire and burned half of the face. With grief he decided to leave the house. 
Supernatural aides encouraged him to ask for help from the OS, and he promised to help the hero on the condition that he would 
protect his chicks from water spirits. The hero agreed, and O. led him to the sun, whose children have cured it with a magic mirror. 
In gratitude the Indian taught them different games and returned to the O. He soon killed a mythical aquatic creature that eats 
babies O. A. When children grew up, they took home a hero. This myth is not only famous among the nations today, but in ancient 
America, cf. Aztec legend about the foundation of Tenochtitlan, where, on the one hand, according to O., sitting on a cactus that 
grew on the stone (so far, O., cactus and stone are the emblem of Mexico), on the other hand, tells the story of the search tree with 
which to make fire. Similar myths are known among the nations of western and southern Siberia - Ket (Yenisei Ostyaks) Vasyugan 
Chant, Tofs (Tofalars). The most important agreement between Ket and American Indian myths harrier nest OA is that they are 
myths about the origin of the fire, about getting him a hero of O. (parrots, other birds, or sometimes a jaguar), which lives with her 
children at the top of the world tree . The myth has far-reaching analogy between the mythology of ancient Mesopotamia, 
particularly in the complex of myths, reconstructed on a number of later reflections and practically coincide with the US-Siberian 
ariant. 



« 







According to Sumerian myth of Lugalbande, ruler of Uruk, O. Anzud in gratitude for the assistance it gave Lugalbande chicks are 
his qualities as speed of movement, ability to reach any place. This myth can be considered as an early literary treatment of a 
Sumerian versions of the myth of the destroyer (defender) socket A. The myth of Gilgamesh describes a tree whose branches in O. 
Anzud in the nest lodged the chick. After Gilgamesh cut down the tree, O. moved to the mountains (the later motive O. relocation to 
the mountains is known from Akkadian epic). Another version of the myth of harrier nest Island, close to Ket, is reflected in the 
Sumerian text, which describes how children are O. Anzu Ninurta to the light (the underworld). 








Go to the Middle East transformation of the same myth (and indirectly reflected in fairy folklore of many nations, including the Slavs) 
can be attributed, and the Georgian legend, on which OS in the underworld of children devoured the neck, and when the prince kills 
O. grateful bar exports Prince from hell. In identical Chukchi and Eskimo myths O. wife is also his wife Raven (cf. the analogy of the 
bird myths of Zeus). She has two children - and voronenok eaglet. O. forbids children to fly in dangerous side to them, but they 
violate the ban three times, and the third time the eagle kidnaps foreign OA (OA split motif). O. possible to return him only with the 
Raven, which the eastern nations paleosibirskih usually acts as a fire or light dobyvatel. The juxtaposition of OA and the crow is 
typical for some North American Indian, North Asian (especially Yakutia) and the Australian myths. The Indians Haida, Tsimshian 
(and some others) in North America known to the division into phratries, O. (or wolf) and crow (which confirms the nature of the 
totemic myths). In Tlingit phratry Yale associated with the raven phratry Kanukov - with OA (or wolf). According to the myth Haida. 
Raven, adorned birds at his home, tired, and therefore made a bad bill OA. The opposite situation is represented in the Yukagir 
tradition according to which the black crow because it pecked O. dualistic myth Yakut contrasted bright deity Homporun Hotoy - the 
progenitor of the people and the head of the upper O. Hara Suoron evil spirits - progenitor of ravens and that part of the Yakuts, 
whose totem was once a crow. With OA were associated white shamans, with the raven - black. Such a correlation O. and crow as 
opposed to polar binary classification of social and mythological characters typical for the northern area of Eurasia and the 
Americas. The same juxtaposition of archaic OS and crow found in the social symbolism and myths of the South-eastern Australia, 
where the wedge-tailed moiety differed O. and Raven. This opposition, O. and Raven took the form of a dualistic myth. 






Along with the plot, which is opposed to the other OS mythological bird (Raven, sometimes the bar, etc.) are fairly common and 
such mythological motifs, which are opposed to O. other animals, especially the lower (water) in the world. 






Extremely widespread in mythology and art of Asia and adjacent areas has the motive of struggle, O. and snakes. According to the 
Akkadian myth of King Ethan, once a snake, and O. friends, but then became enemies after O., fearing that he and his children did 
not have enough food, devouring serpent. In the epic of Gilgamesh, as in typologically with similar descriptions in the myths of 
many other nations, OS communicates with the top of the tree of the world (cf. O. on top of a cactus in Aztec myth), and the snake 
associated with its roots. 

A similar representation for the Indo-European reconstructed by comparing the ancient Icelandic tradition with the ancient Indian 
(Vedic). It is assumed that images of combat drevneyuzhnoaraviyskih O. O. snake represents the solar deity, and the serpent - 
deadly start to associate with the moon. In drevneamerikanskom myth about the origin of Mixtecs are told that two children of the 
gods on behalf of the "Wind-to-nine-snake" and "Wind-to-nine-cave" became, respectively, in the winged serpent, O. and then as 
cultural heroes brought the first sacrifice to the gods. According to the myth of the initial migration of the Aztecs, the name O. The 
Snake was one of four leaders of the Aztecs. The two most common mythological character of animals - the most powerful in the 
world of animals - the lion and the most powerful in the kingdom of birds - often joined OA in a single image of the lion-mixed O. 
(eagle-lion), cf. Anzud. In ancient Mexico, the names of groups of soldiers-0. Warriors and jaguars, on the contrary, contrasted with 
the details of the cult. In the Old Testament in the vision of Ezekiel (see Art. Ezekiel's vision) serves hybrid winged creature with the 
faces of O., a lion and a bull. 







If the archetypal myth of the abduction of the fire are usually associated with a bird, sometimes - with OA, then at the same time 
they can be detected and the symbolism of fire diametrically opposed elements - water. OA is associated with the myth of procuring 
fresh water. Thus, among the Tlingit O. master appears well with fresh water. In the Hutt and drevnehettskih myths (including the 
myth of Telepinuse), in rituals of purification of the imperial couple and construction rite, O., as a messenger of the gods, is sent to 
the sea returned, O. reported that he saw the old gods, bowed down in hell, in the Vedic hymn OS brings a sacred drink Soma from 
the sky to the god Indra (RV IV 27, I). This shows that the relationship with O. Water is determined by its role as a binder between 
the different worlds beginning (as in the myth of the harrier nest OA) and different generations of the gods, such as the messenger 
of the gods, able to quickly cover large distances between these worlds. 




Common mythological motif represents O., abducts the child, which he miraculously saves (as a baby - Gilgamesh in later versions 
of the legend has come down in the transmission of classical writers), or lifts to the sky (as in the Greek myth of Ganymede, Wed 
similar motif on a platter pozdnesasanidskom 6 in. from the Hermitage with the image of the goddess, heave a sacred bird, and two 
oys - the symbols of Mithra and Kochi, parallel with the flat Maya, etc.), or carries the hero myth, rolling from one world to another. 



b< 




In Human myth of Gurparantsahu explains how Arantsah (Human name of the Tigris River) becomes an OA and "air" flying at 
Akkad. The same idea of the OS, the river is reflected in the ancient Hittite name of the river in Asia Minor HaraS-hapas (literally 
"O. -stream"), which has a match in the ancient European gidronimike (kelto-illiriysk. Arlape, Eriaf) and therefore is being built to 
obscheindoevroleyskim names of the rivers, as well as in the archaic Slavic name of the river Orel. O. bond with water due to one 
of the Indo-European names tabuisticheskih A: Lat. aquila, «Eagle" (with further derivatives of the words: aquilo, «the north wind», 
quilus, «dark-brown," "brown-black," etc.) from aqua, «water." 



aq 




Belonging to the lower world is determined to undermine the role of O. Thus, in the Greek myth of transformation in the sea as a 
punishment for the OV Pandreya brother Prokridy who stole the gold of the temple of Zeus the dog (whose bird was the OS). In the 
Tlingit is a myth, where the killer is an unfaithful wife in a shelter, O., married Orlice and hunts eagle "guise", and adjusts the whale 
to the village of his former compatriots (the same opposition OA kit as in other American Indian and paleosibirskih myths). 





Some of the mythological, later ornamental motifs associated with OA, witnessed by monuments of art. The image of the OS that is 
associated with cosmogonic ideas and the myth of the cultural hero, is extremely common in the symbolism of the primitive and 
tribal societies, as well as the ancient world (especially Asia Minor). In ancient Greece, O. (sometimes in the grip of Perun) - the 
most important attribute of Jupiter, receiving (especially in the Hellenistic period, under the influence of Oriental cults) the added 
value a solar symbol. The art of the Renaissance and subsequent periods reflect traditional motifs from classical mythology (O. 
carrying Ganymede of Rembrandt). The image of the double-headed OA, which is probably a reflection of the original characteristic 
of the two-term (symmetric) structure of many archaic motifs associated with OA, and later became very popular in the art (already 
in ancient Asia Minor in the Hittite period) and in heraldry. The heraldic significance for OA is characterized by more Schumer (D. 



with a lion's head), the combat of ancient Rome Insignia, the image of A. (white, black, single-or double-headed) in the State 
Heraldry Byzantium, Poland, Germany and other countries (two-headed O. - most important part of the emblem of Tsarist Russia). 









The biblical metaphor O. embodies divine love, strength and power, youth and vigor, but also of pride (the latter value corresponds 
to the role of these birds in the medieval legend of Alexander the Great, who attempted to reach the sky with the help of two O.). 
Ornamental stylized O. - a typical piece of furniture medieval churches, especially Roman (which are characterized by "eagles' 
capitals' and 'eagle's chair"), as well as liturgical vestments and objects (including Orthodox). 




? 



Due to the legends of "physiology" (eagle soars to aging and sun, plunging it into a magical power, youth and health gains) OA is in 
the Middle Ages the symbol of baptism, and resurrection, the deepening of the religious and didactic meaning as a sign OA 
sublimely ardent Love also contribute to the religious legends of the Island, having a custom to offer up their babies to the sun, and 
the supernatural strength of this bird (which supposedly can contemplate the day-star, without prejudice to the eye). 




OA is a symbol of the Evangelist John, and one of the "four apocalyptic beasts," and in the secular emblems attribute of justice, 
vision (in the allegory of the five senses), pride. 





Passing more of the ancient world tradition of combining into a single composition diametrically opposed characters - O. and snake 
- in the Middle Ages takes the value of struggle of Christ against Satan, and in modern times - turns into a political heraldry. O. 
Symbols as an embodiment of the words used in the 18th century. E. Swedenborg. In the literature, especially poetry, modern 
times, ancient mythological motifs (the image of the poet as Ganymede in the early poetry of Boris Pasternak: "Fire forearms 
Studion hug Eagle") are interwoven with the later medieval symbolism, which often combines the two most universal zoomorphic 
mythological characters - About . and the Lion ("all understand, seeing the lion, seeking to trace, and an eagle flying to him," 
Gumilev). Andrei Platonov in the story "Jan" used the archetypal image of hunting for OA, in which the bait is a person (as the 
Indians Hidatsa) and the opposition hunter: O. flips (which is typical of mythopoetic thought). 



: 





Appendix B. 




New York: "Soviet Encyclopedia", 1982) 




BA in Egyptian mythology, one of the elements that make up the human essence. Egyptian writer 4. Horapollo, who wrote a treatise 
on Egyptian hieroglyphics, translated by B. Coptic as "soul." This value is used to this day, although the concept of "soul" does not 
exactly match the representation of B. In the Egyptian Old Kingdom period, according to the "Pyramid Texts", the possession of B. 
ascribed only to the gods and pharaohs. B. was conceived as the embodiment of strength and power. They could be several (plura 
am Bau). Later, according to the "Text coffins" and "Book of the Dead", was considered the embodiment of B. vitality of all the 
people that continue to exist after their death. Living in the tomb and remains in full communion with the dead, Bl can be separated 
from the body and move freely, it makes "exit day" of the tomb, rises to the sky, accompanied by a person in the afterlife. B. carries 
out all the physical functions of man: eating, drinking, etc. depicted as a bird with his head, and sometimes by human hands. B. As 
gods are often not sacred animals (eg, B. Sebek - Crocodile, Osiris - Ram, B. many gods - a snake) or any other deity [sic, in 
Latopole Khnum (Esna) considered B. Shu, in Gipselise - Osiris, in Leontopole - Hebe, on the island of Elephantine - Ra]. B. had 
not only people but also many cities Germopol, Butoh, lerakonpol etc. - Comm. first. 







Yima (avest. lima), etc., pers. Yama (lama), in Iranian mythology ancestor of humanity, culture hero, creator of the benefits of 
civilization, the organizer of social organization, the lord of the world in the era of millennial golden age. With him immortality 
prevailed, there was no disease, old age, death, moral evils ("Videvdat» II, «Yasna" 9, I-5). Etymologically, the name is interpreted 
as a "twin", "double". The image goes back to the Indo-lranian (cf. the first man in Pit of Vedic mythology) and the Indo-European 
epoch (cf. skandhas. Ymir), to archaic myths about twin brothers, sons of the sun. In some versions of the myth, was sawn in half 
by J. arm Spityury own brother, seduced by an evil spirit. Father J. Vivahvant considered (cf. al-ind. Vivasvat, the father of Yama), 
the incarnation of the sun. Sam J. preserved features of a solar hero, though in "Avesta" it is usually death, the place of his actions 
are always on the ground, people in the world. Indian sources have portrayed the Pit master the underworld, sitting in the assembly 
of gods and souls righteous. Zapadnoiranskih of texts 5. BCE. Oe. found at Persepolis, that the Persian by the name of Yama, and 
apparently in function was closer to Indian than Avestan image, a deity, and not man. In the Indo-lranian myth bliznechnom first 
man - the brother and husband of a woman progenitor (Yama and Yami in the "Rig Veda", Yima and Yimak in "Bundahishn"). 
Divine status attributed to J. "Aban-Yasht» (V 25), it is placed on the holy mountain Jucar and creates a sacrifice to the goddess 
Anahita Ardvisura sake of gaining power "over gods and men." J. claims to supremacy among the gods - a feature of the archaic 




Indo-lranian times, not preserved in the rest of the "Avesta". "Rigveda" (10, 51, 3) attributes the Pit opening fire on the earth, 
civilizing mission. This is a myth in the Iranian tradition is represented in priestly aspect: J. kindled in Khorezm first on the 
sacredness of other types of fire holy fire-priests Atur Farnbag. According to one version, the fire was later moved to the west, on 
the other - in Kabul ("Bundahishn" 17, 5-6). Meanwhile, "Videvdate» (II3, etc.) J. rejected the offer to him the god of priestly duties, 
limiting supposedly the king. There is a sectarian differences in interpretation of popular image. On the J. obschetipologicheskom 
level - character in the myth about the loss of the "golden age" as a result of universal catastrophe. On the Indo-lranian level, he - 
and the first ancestor of death, "the owner of two-legged and four-footed" (cf. "Atharvaveda" 4, 28, 3) that orders the world. At the 
actual level of Iranian during the formation of the Zoroastrian orthodoxy original role has undergone a significant transformation J.: 
he took away the halo perfect Indo-lranian ruler "golden age" and the guarantor of immortality. Loss of the Golden Age was 
declared Zaragushtroy consequence of hubris, and J. Fall, a quasi myth arose of how to J. bounced a symbol of his royal dignity, 
hvarno. The second chapter, "Videvdata" and "Horn Yasht," ("Yasna" 9, 1-11) metaphorically, but "Zamyad-Yasht» (XIX) openly tell 
us about the transfer hvarno Zarathustra. The image of J. - darovatelya creature comforts and physical immortality - was opposed 
to the prophet - the reformer of faith, the herald of spiritual immortality. The desire to discredit the priesthood of orthodox J., and the 
fact that he - the only person archaic Indo-lranian folklore, mentioned in the "Gathas" (32, 8), where there was no place even Mithra 
and Anahita Ardvisura clearly indicate the primacy of his role on the stage of existence dozoroastriyskom mythology. In "Younger 
Avesta 'ancestors depicted Gayomart. 






KAI Cavus (Farsi) in Iranian mythology second king of the dynasty Keyyanidov, theomachist. KK (Kavi Usan avest.) with demons 
build palaces on Mount Alburz and tries to rise into the sky, using the eagles, but the Eagles dumped him over the river Amul in the 
woods, where KK are his nobles. According to the "Denkartu" KK has built beautiful palaces, old men, belonging to one of them, 
are young again. On religious priestly Zoroastrian tradition, K. - a negative character, for acts against the supreme deity, intending 
to extend its authority and to the sky, for which he was thrown into the ocean of air. Echoes of a negative attitude to KK preserved 
in the "Shahnameh." 







In the "Shahnameh" bold K. Kai Qubad inherits rules and one hundred fifty years. Wanting to destroy evil, he goes on a campaign 
against the kingdom of the Devas in Mazandaran, but blinded gets together with his entourage in captivity to the White deva. KK 
asks the assistance of the hero Rustam, which frees it and returns his sight by the liver deva. However, KK gets into trouble again. 
Falling in love with the daughter of an insidious hamavaranskogo (Yemen, the central or northern Arabia) King Sudaba beauty, he 
goes to war against the king, and again taken prisoner, of which he was again rescued by Rustam. Seduced by the devil, Iblis, KK 
wants to climb with the eagles, bearing his throne in heaven, and will fail again: together with the eagles in exhausted he falls to the 
ground near Amul, here it saves Rustam. - Note, first. 





Farn [back to drevneiran. * Hvarnah-, usually interpreted as a symbol of solar radiant beginning, the divine fire, his physical 
emanations (cf. the Vedas. Svar, «light," "Lights," "shine", "Sun"), increasingly coming, the expanding force, something desirable, 
has been achieved, where - "a good (good) thing," "dreaming," "good," "property". Zend. "Glory," "greatness," "shine," "Lights," 
"charisma," etc., and Sogdiana. prn, «Glory," "sign," etc., Ossetia. farn, «abundance", "happiness" and "peace", etc., pers. farna, 
Wed-pers. xvarrah, «imperial glory," "Majesty," Persian, farr, «shine," "splendor," "splendor," etc., and Sogdiana. prn, frn, Sak. 
pharra, «position", "rank", "dignity", "title", etc.], in the Iranian tradition mythopoetic divine essence that brings wealth, power and 
authority; majestic strength. Apparently, the FA acted as a sacred impersonal beginning of abstract or concrete (the material 
symbol) character, and as personified divine character. In "Avesta" F. - usually a kind of sacred good percentage, "good thing" 
("Yasht» XVII6). They may possess the divine characters daruyuschie his people ("Datastan-and-Denike"), the people themselves, 
for which the FA is usually embodied in wealth ("Yasht" X 8 "clear," 60, 2, 4), house wife , children, livestock, health ("Yasht» XV 
56, is known formula F. wishes for good health in later Zoroastrian texts). F. has common attributes of food, food that is in the 
Iranian language can be denoted by the same word as F., or its derivatives. FA serves as a good spirit-guardian of the house, in 
case of death of the owner, he leaves home, unless certain conditions are met (see the reflection in Ossetian tradition saying 
"quiet, do not forget about the FA at home," the notion that parental F. does not go into the realm of the dead). AF has a particular 
village, region, country, nation. In some cases, says F., hidden deep in the water ("Yasht» XIX 51-64), on AF associated with the 
waters and rivers, with the sun acting as a giver F. ("Denkart"). Sometimes AF is realized not only in material form, as symbolically - 
as happiness, share the fate of (in this sense it is comparable with the Greek Tyche, the Roman Fortuna, genius, etc.). It is this 
characteristic of AF seems to Aryans in general, priests, Kawi, Zarathustra ("Yasht" X 105). Those who have AF, - "the owner of the 
good fate." FM - the object of praise ("Yasht» XIX), he is invincible and powerful: he wins the satellite, which is in the form of radiant 
fire ("Before the blazing fire flies Mitra, powerful Farn Kawi", "Yasht" H127). The image of a shining, F., the highest share of the 
divine which is in the possession of supreme power (the king), was embodied in the king's nimbus. A more recent tradition of 
learned image as a symbol of permanence F. Shah's government in Iran. AF as a proportion of the fate of marriage and was 
associated with funeral rites. Wed, such as reflected in the later tradition: the evidence of Armenian authors Favstosa Buzand (5., 
"History of Armenia», IV 24) and Khorenatsi (late 5th early. 6 cc, "History of Armenia» III 27) according to which the royal tomb - a 
place where the king's FA after his death; Tajik idea that the soul of a ram (to be associated with AF) helps the soul of man to cross 
the bridge leading to heaven, etc. In the Ossetians in introduction of the groom's house the best man shout "F. walks! "wedding 
songs are sung F., etc. Iranian religious and mythological tradition was alien to the idea of a bad F. Summary mythology about how 
the FA leaves its owner, is associated with limoy, from which flew into F. shape of a bird varegtsa ("Yasht» XIX 32). The same motif 
occurs later. AF is not only associated with animals, but often transformed into a zoomorphic images. The connection with the bird 
varegna F. (Falcon Vargan, the incarnation of Veretragny) may indicate a reference in "Yasht» (XIV 36) on an amulet of feathers, 



which brings respect, gives F. reconstruction (G. Bailey) to view the F. in the form of ghazal. Widespread, especially in Sassanian 
art was embodied the image of a ram as F. This links with the FA Veretragnoy, whose attribute was a ram. Starting with Shapur II 
image as a symbol of the ram god F. became widespread, and Ammianus Marcellinus, reports that in one battle Shapur II had on 
her head ornate headdress in the form of a sheep's head (Res gestae XIX1, 3). Similar images are known to Kushano-Sasanian 
coins, objects of dishes and utensils. In the Pahlavi treatise 6. "Karnamaki Ahtahsheri Papakan" the image of a sheep on a horse 
stands as the embodiment of royal keyyanidskogo F. Wed use of the image in the structure ram royal throne: the "Shahnameh" Kai 
Cavus gives Rustam throne in the form of a ram. Apparently, this symbolism was more deeply rooted. Already on luristanskih 
bronzes, on the stele of Untashgala at even earlier seals marked characters with a crown, decorated with rams' horns. Images of 
sheep are present in numerous zoomorphic handles vessels in the Central Asian Sarmatian and ceramics of the first centuries. Oe. 
(Sometimes a sheep instead serve goat, boar, dog, etc.). BA Litvinsky interprets them as zoomorphic symbols F. - guardian of the 
vessel. Not excluded in the form of communication F. ram with Ossetian "master of the bedroom," Award Suite offspring (a kind of 
substitute for "ruler bedroom" is a "holy sheep," to which the marriage ceremony is requested that the boys were born, Wed 
connection F. with marriage ceremonies). With a personalized way of the divine, F., may be linked to the discovery of gold amulet 
with Kuban inscription containing the name of Uatafarnes, as interpreted by several investigators, F. (deity) of the home. In the 
Iranian tradition, there are many examples where the FA was represented in human form. In the Manichean Sogdian -version of the 
tale of Caesar and thieves thief, dressed in royal robes, turns to lying in the tomb of Caesar, declaring that he is likely to FA, FA as 
a special deity was a member of the Sogdian pantheon (reconstruction VB Hennig). In Bactria in the Kushan F. portrayed as a man 
in robes. Widely known images of male deities Far (p) of the Kushan coins on. 





Iranian FM derived from - * hvarnah influenced the formation of similar concepts from neighboring peoples (cf. ancient Turkic qut or 
fame. * Slava), and in some cases they have borrowed (cf. Tocharian Iranism perne, param, or possibly Slavic "guys the guy "as a 
designation of social and age categories of men ready to marry). 








Special prestige that was associated with the concept of F. predetermined extremely widespread use of "F." in onomastics 
ispecially royal). 





Y THE LAST LAMP 






TraditionalLib.narod.ru 



© The transition point 






http://luxaur.narod.rU/biblio/2/tr/evola45.htm 





Julius Evola - Hitler and the secret societies 




Translation AB 

It is noteworthy that a number of French authors attempted to study the relationship between German National Socialism and 
secret societies and initiatic organizations. The reason for this was the version of the alleged origin of the occult movements of 
Hitler. This thesis was originally nominated to the well-known and highly implausible Pauwels and Bergier book "Matin des 
Magiciens" ("Morning magicians"), in which National Socialism was defined as the unity of "magical thinking" and technology. 
Expression used there sounded like "Tank divisions plus Rene Guenon": a phrase that could make this an outstanding 
representative of the traditionalist thought and esoteric disciplines with indignation to roll in his grave. 





The first misunderstanding arises here - a mixture of the mystical element to the mythical, while they do not have anything in 
common. The role of myths in National Socialism is undeniable, for example in the idea of state-Reich, a charismatic Fuhrer, Race, 
Blood, etc. But before you call them "myths" should be attached to them the concept of Sorel's "motivational ideas, energies" 
(which usually are all offered by the demagogues, ideas), and do not assign them to a magical dimension. Similarly, no rational 
person does not think about the connection of magic with the myths of fascism, such as the myth of Rome, or about the leader- 
duce a greater extent than is the case with the same French Revolution or Communism. The study would have gone otherwise, 
subject to the assumption that some movement without knowing it, were not entirely subject to human influences. But in the case of 
the French authors is not the case. They do not think about the influences of this kind, but on the particular situation created by the 
real-existing organizations, some of which were more or less "secret". Similarly, some spoke of "unknown superiors" who are 



supposed to have brought about the National Socialist movement and Hitler used as a medium, although it is unclear what goals 
they might pursue in this case. If we consider the results disastrous consequences to which National Socialism led, even indirectly, 
those goals were to be dark and destructive. It would be possible to identify "occult side" of the movement that Guenon called 
"counter-initiation." But the French, the authors also put forward the thesis that Hitler, as "medium" at some point, freed from the 
tutelage of "unknown superiors", like the poor, and that during this time the movement took its fatal direction. But in this case, we 
must admit that these "unknown superiors" had no foresight and very limited ability, if were unable to stop their alleged psychic 
Hitler. 







At a particular level has been a lot of fantasies weave the origin of symbols and those of National Socialism. At the same time 
referred to some previous organization, but to those who are extremely difficult to be attributed to a genuine and factual initiatic 
character. There is no doubt that Hitler did not invent German racial doctrine, a symbol of the swastika, or Aryan antisemitism: all 
this has long existed in Germany. The book, entitled "Der Mann, der Hitler die Ideen gab" ("The man who gave Hitler his ideas") 
announces that Jorge Lanz von Libenfelse (the title was assigned to them), a former Cistercian monk and founder of the Order, 
which has already used the swastika, Lantz, since 1905, produced a periodical "Ostara", of which Hitler certainly knew, and that 
Aryan and antisemitic racial theories were already well developed. 




But far more important in the "occult origin of the" National Socialism was a part of the Thule Society. There is much more 
complicated. This company has grown from Germanenorden, founded in 1912 and headed by Rudolf von Sebottendorf who once 
lived in the East and makes a strange booklet "Die Praxis der alten turkischen Freimaurerei" ("Practical rituals of the ancient 
Turkish Freemasonry"). Practices described in it, included the repetition of sounds, gestures and steps, whose goal, as in alchemy, 
initiatic transformation of man was. It is unclear from what Turkish masonic organization Sebottendorf was in contact, and also, 
tiether he considered himself practices, or simply describe them. 





In addition, it is impossible to establish whether these practices are adopted in the Thule Society, headed by Sebottendorf. It would 
be important to figure this out, because many high-ranking National Socialists of Hitler to Rudolf Hess, frequented the society. In a 
sense, Hitler was already initiated into the world of ideas of the Thule Society by Hess during their joint conclusion of the Munich 
Putsch failed after. 







In any case, it should be emphasized that the Thule Society was less initiatic than a secret organization, which already had a 
swastika as a symbol and was characterized by a strong anti-Semitism and German racial thinking. It should be cautious about the 
thesis that the very name of Thule is a serious and conscious reference to the North, the Pole, by reference, which is trying to 
establish continuity with the Hyperborean origins of the Indo-Germans - since Thule appears in ancient tradition as a sacred center 
or sacred island in the Far North . "Thule" may be just paraphrase the name "Thale", the town in the Harz, where Germanenorden 
in 1914 held a conference at which it was decided to create a secret "volkisch" party to combat the so-called Jewish International. 
First of all, these ideas were put forward in his book Sebottendorf "Bevor Hitler kam" ("Before Hitler came"), published in Munich in 
1933, in which he pointed to the myths and "volkisch" world that existed before Hitler. 

Thus a serious study of initiatic connections with secret societies, Hitler is not going. Need to make some explanations about Hitler 
as a "medium" and its ability to attract people. It seems pure fantasy, that he acquired these abilities initiatic path. Otherwise, the 
same is assumed about psychic abilities of other leaders such as Mussolini and Napoleon, but this is absurd. Much better to 
assume that there is a kind of psychic maelstrom that is the result of mass movements, and that it is concentrated in the person of 
the heart and gives him a kind of radiant power, which is felt particularly suggestible people. 








Medium quality (which, strictly speaking, are the antithesis of the initiatic qualification) can be attributed to Hitler with a few 
reservations, because in a sense he was obsessed with (that distinguishes it, for example, from Mussolini). When he whipped up 
the masses to fanaticism, giving the impression that some force is using it as a medium, even though he is in and of itself was a 
very unusual and extremely gifted. Anyone who has heard Hitler's speeches, addressed to the delight of the masses, can not 
disagree. Since we have already indicated our reservations about the alleged involvement of "unknown superiors", will not be easy 
to determine the qualitative nature of this super-personal force. Relatively Theosophy [Gotteserkenntnis] National sotsialima, ie 
regarding his alleged mystical and metaphysical dimension, one must understand the unique combination in this movement and in 
the Third Reich of mythical, education and even scientific aspects. In Hitler can see many signs of a man with a typically "modern" 
world views, which are essentially profane, naturalistic and materialist, while at the same time, he believed in Providence, whose 
instrument he saw himself, especially regarding the fate of the German nation. (For example, he saw the hand of Providence in his 
salvation after an assassination attempt in the East Prussian headquarters.) Alfred Rosenberg, the ideologist of the movement, 
proclaimed the myth of Blood, in which he spoke about the "mystery" of Nordic blood and attributed it to a sacred value, and at the 
same time he attacked all the rituals and sacraments of Catholicism as a delusion, just as the people of the Enlightenment. He 
railed against the "dark people of our time," while attributing the Aryan man after the creation of modern science. Interest of 
National Socialism to the runes, the ancient Nordic-Germanic letter-signs, should be regarded as purely symbolic, about the same 



as the Nazis used some roman characters, and without any esoteric meaning. Program of National Socialism to create a superman 
has an element of "biological mistiitsizma", but again - it was a scientific project. At best, it might be a question of "superman" of 
Nietzsche, but does not supermen in the initiatic sense. 




Plan "to create a new racial, religious and military Order of initiates, assembled around the divine Fuhrer" can not be regarded as 
an official policy of National Socialism, as Rene writes Hello, when shows such tendencies and even compares it, among other 
things, with Ismailis in Islam. Several elements of the higher levels were observed only in the SS. 





First, it is explicit intention of Reichsfuhrer-SS Heinrich Himmler to create an Order, which should have been combined elements of 
Prussian ethics and old orders of chivalry, especially the Teutonic Order. He sought legitimacy for an organization, but could not get 
it, as the radical wing of National Socialism openly opposed this old Roman Catholic orders. Not being able to establish the 
continuity of traditional, Himmler also sought contact with the Nordic-Hyperborean heritage and its symbolism (Thule), albeit without 
the participation and influence of "secret societies", as described above. He, like Rosenberg, watching the Dutchman Herman Wirth 
research in the field of Nordic-Atlantic tradition. Later Himmler with Wirth will research and education organization called the 
"Ahnenerbe". It's pretty interesting, but no "occult origin" in this case, no. 





So pure the result is negative. Fantasy French authors reached the highest point in the book "Hitler et la tradition cathare" ("Hitler 
and the Cathar tradition"), Jean-Michel Angebera (Paris, 1971). This refers to the Cathars, also known as Albigensians, a heretical 
sect that spread especially in Southern France between the 1 1th and 12th centuries and which had in the center of the fortress 
Montsegur. According to Otto wound, it was destroyed in time, "a crusade against the Grail", as the title of one of his books. What 
does the Grail and its knights had to this sect remains completely unclear. The sect was characterized by a kind of fanatical 
Manicheism: sometimes its members preferred to die of starvation or some other reason as a demonstration of their separateness 
from the world and their hostility to the mundane, the carnal and material existence. It is assumed that Rahn, with whom I 
corresponded during his life, trying to convince the unreasonableness of his thesis was in the SS and that the expedition was sent 
in search of the legendary Holy Grail, which was probably transferred to a safe place at the time of the Cathar fortress of Montsegur 
destruction. It is believed that after the fall of Berlin, a military detachment reached the Zillertal and hidden this object at the foot of 
the glacier, wait for better times. 







The truth is that the rumor went the troop unit, which however were less mystical powers, namely, salvation and the Treasure 
Reich. Two further examples show what can cause such fantasies when they are released into the wild. SS (which included not 
only military units, but also researchers, and academic experts) sent an expedition to Tibet to make discoveries in the field of 
mountaineering and Ethnology, and another - in the Arctic, ostensibly for scientific research, but also for possible deployment of 
German military base. But according to this, fantastic interpretations, the first expedition was looking for a secret relationship with 
the center of tradition, while the other was looking for contact with the lost Hyperborean Thule ... 




TraditionalLib.narod.ru 




© The transition point 




http://luxaur.narod.rU/biblio/2/tr/evola33.htm 




Julius Evola - Mystery of the Grail 





Approaching the Mystery of the Grail 
1 . Literary prejudice 







2. Ethnological prejudice 



3. On the traditional method 



4. The historical context of the Grail Mysteries 



? 





Mystery of the Grail. The imperial tradition gibellinskaya 









1 . Olimpiysky cycle 

2. "Hero" and "Lady" 

3. Hyperborean theme 

4. The tradition in Ireland 

5. Cycle of legends about King Arthur 




6. Imperial legend - Master of the Universe 

7. Friedrich - John Priest - Imperial Tree 



8. Dante - Veltro and Dux - "The Hound" and "leader" 





Approaching GRAIL MYSTERIES 




Anyone who wants to gain insight into romances and epics, to which the cycle of legends about the Holy Grail, along with many 
other related works, must overcome a number of prejudices, and above all that which I call a literary prejudice. 




mean a certain bias, those who think novels and legends is just fantastic and poetic works, the products of individual or collective 
creativity, and these people deny everything that has a higher symbolic value and goes beyond the subjective creativity. However, 
it is this symbolic, objective and super-individual element is at the heart of sagas, legends, myths, tales of the exploits of the heroes 
of the epics and the traditional world 1 . He was not always paid by the author consciously. The most important and significant 
elements, especially in the case of works only partly collective, often expressed by the authors almost unconsciously, and they did 
not realize that obey certain external influences, at some point, these effects are used direct intent or creative impulses of 
individuals or groups of people to achieve their own goals . 








Thus, even in cases where at first sight in the foreground are spontaneous, poetic or fantastic elements, they are merely a 
convenient cover, means of expression, which will delay the account only the superficial reader. Some authors have attempted to 
create a work of art only, and that he was quite successful - managed so that their work admired by those who understand the 
aesthetics of the product and can be appreciated its estimate, but no more. However, this does not mean that these authors in their 
"artistic works" and the creative impulses have not implemented anything more, they managed to preserve and pass on, and 
sometimes higher maintenance update, which is always able to recognize the trained eye. Some authors certainly would be 
amazed if they had just pointed out how their work serve to illustrate this assertion. 




As a rule, creating works based on legends and their authors are not aware that creating something out of the ordinary art and the 
human imagination, almost always, they had only a vague sense of the magnitude of those that stood in the center of their works. 
Creative design, going beyond individual psychology, spread with sagas and legends, penetrating into the peripheral area of 
consciousness and even beyond, that is, on the influence of more subtle, profound and important. From the point of view of 
psychoanalysis, dreams are a state in which repressed and displaced from the effect of waking consciousness, begin to directly 
control the imagination, to put in characters. Normal consciousness perceives them, not getting into their real content. What is 
unusual, ghostly or disconnected they seem, the more reason to suspect the existence of latent, sensible and meaningful content. 






In many cases, this is how one should treat sagas, legends, adventure, myths, and even fairy tales. Often the most fantastic, 
strange, unbelievable and disjointed episode, which is the smallest aesthetic or historical value, and therefore usually left 
unaddressed, ultimately the key to understanding the central element, encompassing the true meaning of the work, and in some 



cases and higher historical value. In one legend (hereafter, I will show its connection with the tradition of the Grail) states: "Where I 
have said about our science vague and cryptic, to say precisely and clearly everything." The Roman emperor Julian wrote: "When 
the sacred myths are absurd from the standpoint of logic, the very fact that they urge us not to believe them literally, and to explore 
and identify their hidden meaning of" 2. 




So, this is the first prejudice to be overcome. It affects the way the medieval interpretation of the novels, and especially of literature 
"true love" (Fedeli D'Amore). Since this type of literature is replete with a purely external elements of art and poetry, many consider 
inappropriate for at least any attempt to give her extra-literary interpretation, ie to penetrate the mystery of poetic literature. 
Meanwhile, these attempts are not only related influences, which produced a cycle of legends about the Holy Grail, but certain 
organizations, acting behind the scenes stories. 




Chapter 2. Ethnological prejudice 




The second prejudice, which must be overcome - ethnological. It is mainly concerned with finding numerous hidden roots of the 
cycle of legends, to which belongs the legend of the Grail. The researchers found only in these legends folklore fragments and 
elements of the archaic, primitive, folk beliefs. It should be noted that such elements are actually present in the tradition of the Grail. 
Moreover, they link the historical aspect, confirming that this tradition is alive and powerful, with supra-and initiatic aspects of the 
legend of the Holy Grail. 




First of all, it is necessary to extend the scope of the collective that the relativity of "creative" aspect, which I wrote earlier in relation 
to individual works. Most people see in the folklore of spontaneous folk art or a fantastic collective work, mixed with superstition, 
which in fact should be seen as an oddity. Under the influence of this prejudice so-called ethnological school, like the 
psychoanalytic lines, studying the "collective unconscious", engaged in research which is always reduced to petty systematic 
elegation of the fact that better and better to the level that the damaging and worse. 



re 





And now I would like to challenge the very notion of "primitive", which is attributed to some folk legends today. Such traditions are 
not "primitive" (primordial) and in most cases they are nothing like the remains, dating back to the ancient cycle of civilization. I 
therefore join the opinion of Rene Guenon, the so-called folklore almost always contains the traditional elements in the true sense 
of the word, although sometimes they are distorted, fragmented and weakened. These elements have a great symbolic value, they 
are not born in the minds of people, they are not even human origin, the only characteristic of them is popular feature is that they 
"survived", given that these elements are part of long-extinct traditional forms. 




These extinct traditional forms sometimes have their roots in the distant past so that it can not even describe the past, which is 
hidden in the twilight of prehistory. In this sense, people act as more or less unconscious collective memory, the contents of which 
originates from a istochnika3. 




also agree with Guenon, when he explains the curious fact that people in these cases are carriers of many elements of a higher 
plan, for example, initiatic, which is essentially "nenaroden." When the traditional form is on the verge of extinction, its last 
representatives may entrust an effort of collective memory that would otherwise be lost. In other words, it's the only way to save 
what can still be saved. At the same time a natural lack of understanding by the masses - a sufficient guarantee that the esoteric 
elements will not be lost, but will continue to exist as a kind of evidence of the past for those who are in a later era would 
understand them and usvoit4. 







This last remark is particularly true for elements of the alleged "pagan" West Nordic folklore, which are present in the legends of the 
Holy Grail and King Arthur. These elements, if they are properly integrated (ie, return them to their original symbolic meaning, and 
restoring vnutritraditsionnye mezhtraditsionnye connection), will give the actual content of some novels and epics, which were 
highly appreciated in the medieval chivalric world and have been linked to the spiritual ideal gibellinskim Imperium and some 
arcane traditions and groups, who have inherited this ideal in various forms. 




Thus, clearly seen the difference between this approach and the psychoanalytic theories of the above subconscious and collective 
unconscious, which has become a psychoanalyst a sort of "grandma's trunk." What it is not just, all content is considered one way 
or another (to a greater or lesser extent) in terms of "everyday life", "atavism" and "irrational." The fact that all these theories are 
considered "unconscious", but rather should be regarded as belonging to the superconscious. Absurd to consider the myths and 
symbols and manifestations of archetypes "everyday life", because they are essentially within the domain of metaphysics, and they 



have nothing to do with "everyday life", unless we're talking about the empty shells. I believe pointless argument, KG Young and 
Richard Vilgelma5 that any positive opinion should be limited to the study of the manifestations of the "unconscious", which refers 
to pure experience, without any reference to a transcendental element. 




The fact is that when there are no reliable point of support, it is impossible to navigate in all kinds of experience, understand and 
appreciate it, especially when he blindly identified with its partial manifestations, which are also often exposed to the factors of a 
pathological nature. This is clearly evidenced by the results of various psychoanalytic interpretations. They do not rise to the 
spiritual level. Moreover, even when they do not lead to subnormal world of neurasthenia and hysteria, causing aberrations such as 
those described by Sigmund Freud in his book "Totem and Taboo", they nevertheless cause (as is the case with the theory of 
"archetypes," Jung's) sense of confusion and uncertainties to which strongly influences the new superstitious cult of "vitality", thus 
•roving not only the absence of principles as the presence of erroneous principles. 





Chapter 3. On the traditional method 



It is also necessary to overcome the tendency to derive the basic theme of the Holy Grail and the Imperial Myth exclusively from 
private historical trends, suggesting the existence of external reasons and empirical relationships. It is widely believed that the Holy 
Grail - essentially a Christian legend. Some authors have expressed the hypothesis of its pagan Celtic proishozhdenii6, others are 
in favor of the Indo-Chinese versii7, others support the version of the Syriac proishozhdenii8 and elevate it to some alhimii9. In 
some cases, the Holy Grail is associated not only with the doctrines of the Cathars and the ancient Persians, but some authors 
wen tried to identify the characters and the historical places described in the legend (some call to France, others - Iran). 




It is important to not even the fact that such comparisons are invalid, the main thing - the general spirit of inquiry. A characteristic 
feature of the method, which I call the "traditional" (as opposed to the profane, the empirical and the critical-intellectual method of 
modern research), is a special character or accentuation of the universality doctrine and its identification with the appropriate 
symbols found in other traditions. This opens the presence of something that is the supreme and prior to each of these 
manifestations, which differ from each other and at the same time are equal. Due to the fact that taken separately tradition can 
express any idea more fully and more clearly than any other tradition. Therefore, attempts to identify the correspondence between 
the different traditions represented by one of the most productive ways to understand and integrate what otherwise appear in a 
fragmentary and obscure form. 








I intend to use this method, although most modern scholars are different. First, they establish a relationship is not true, but only 
inaccurate approximation. In other words, they explore the empirical and uncertain circumstances are always material of 
communicating ideas or legends from one nation to another, from one literature to another. However, they completely ignore the 
fact that wherever we see the effects better than plan level of individual consciousness, the establishment of linkages can occur in 
an unusual way, not needing to match the specific temporal and spatial conditions and external historical contacts. In addition, it is 
important that any comparison of these recent studies completed in the direction of care, rather than expansion prospects. For 
example, when a scientist finds a match of some elements of the legend of the Holy Grail elements detected, for example, in the 
Persian tradition, he believes that "the identification of first-hand" with the result, a researcher proudly announce to the world that 
"the Holy Grail - a Persian symbol!" The observed relationship is not helping him to clarify one tradition over another, or to 
understand a tradition, referring to the universal, metaphysical and supra-maintenance, which can be more clear and unambiguous 
in the appropriate symbol, present in other traditions. In other words, the relationship does not appear in true perspective, and 
regresses to a simplified two-dimensional model. Thus, there is no study of fertile material, which could not be better could send a 
researcher into the depths, from surface measurements of the two to the third, which can help organize and interpret the collected 



data. 









Now I would like to make one clarification regarding attempts to interpret the Holy Grail in the context of historical characters and 
situations, given that such attempts have been made in respect of other legends who have important connections with the legend of 
the Holy Grail (for example, the legend of King Arthur and Prester John) . 







Strictly speaking, these attempts can be traced so-called evgemeristicheskuyulO trend that have adopted modern scholars, guided 
by the constant search for any possible relegate highest to lowest. From their point of view, the characters of myths and legends - 
only the abstract projection of historical figures, replaced their prototypes and become myths and legends. However, the truth must 
be sought in the opposite direction: there are higher reality, the primary order, hidden in the symbols and myths. It may happen that 
in the course of historical development of certain structures or characters embody these realities. When this happens, history and 
sverhistoriya overlap and are integrated, in which case the human imagination can instinctively ascribe mythic features of these 
characters and structures, because reality has become symbolic, and the symbol became a reality. In such cases, interpretation 
evgemeristicheskaya completely distorts the true relationship. In fact, the primary element is a myth, and it should be considered a 



starting point, a historical character or circumstances - only one of the possible and the resulting expression of a higher order of 
things. 







In other works I pointed out the true meaning of the absurd and random, at first glance, the relationship linking the various historical 
characters in legends, although from a historical point of view of the characters do not overlap in either space or time. These 
relationships are established, because such characters are perceived as equivalent manifestations of a single principle or function. 
Many pedigrees containing mythological ancestor, appeared in the same way: a legendary pedigree vividly expresses the spiritual 
continuity, which can be real without biological continuity in time and space. It is from this point of view should be considered 
pedigrees of kings Holy Grail, Lohengrin, Arthur, Prester John, Geliasa etc. Moreover, such an ideal situation, arising from the 
interaction of history and sverhistorii give us a clue to the genesis and content of the legend of the Holy Grail and its elements that 
10 back not only to the idea of Empire, supra, but also to one of its particular manifestations in the Western medieval world. 




Chapter 4. The historical context of the Grail Mysteries 

If we consider the texts that make up the cycle of legends about the Holy Grail, individually, we can see that they are repeated 
several major themes expressed in the symbolic images of knights and their exploits. The main themes appear a hidden center, 
spiritual exploration and testing, succession, or return to the legitimate throne, which are sometimes combined with the themes of 
healing and revenge. Persifal, Gawain, Galahad, Oger, Lancelot and Peredur - different names under which depicts the same type 
of man, the same way King Arthur, Joseph of Arimathea, Presbyter John and The Fisher King - equivalent figures and other 
variations on a theme. It is also equivalent images of mysterious castles, islands, kingdoms and far dangerous countries, which are 
described sequentially, creating, on the one hand, a strange surreal atmosphere, and, on the other - often makes the narrative 
monotone. 




have already noted that all this has or may have the character of "mystery" in initiatic sense. But in fact, as expressed in the cycle 
of legends about the Holy Grail, we must recognize the imposition of supra-reality of history. Here the symbols of the mysteries is 
firmly linked to unclear, but living a feeling that in order to carry it out, it was necessary to allow the spiritual and secular crisis of an 
era of universal-imperial Middle Ages. 




Cycle of legends about the Holy Grail was born exactly in this very specific situation. Evocation of primordial and supra-motifs 
crossed with the rise of the historical tradition of the point around which crystallize the material of different nature and origin of the 
combined ability to express the general idea. Thus, we must proceed from the fundamental ideas, the internal unity of the various 
texts, symbols, characters and their adventures and discover the hidden power of a single text and to continue to integrate the 
other until, until we get a complete picture of the main themes. The construction of such motives to their universal, 
mezhtraditsionnomu value and to the general history of metaphysics, it would be a repetition of what I tried to do in his other 
rabotel 1 , here I shall confine myself to pointing out the starting points, the most important for understanding the historical and 
supra-historical values of the mystery of the Grail. 





MYSTERY Grail. The imperial tradition gibellinskaya 




Chapter 1. Olimpiysky cycl 




According to our concept that existed among different peoples under the name of "tradition" was not something relative and 
conditioned by various external and purely historical factors, but has always been associated with the elements of an essentially 
unified knowledge, which represented a "constant". 










So all the traditional teachings in one form or another always and everywhere claimed the existence of a single original race, the 
bearer of transcendent spirituality, which for this reason was considered as a race of "divine" or "kindred race of gods." We have 
defined this race as the "Olympic" to emphasize thus its inherent superiority, because its very nature is at its core it was weird. The 
strength that comes from above, was in this race a permanent "presence" and that "the presence" of a higher power predispose 
this race to the board, to perform the royal functions, making it a race of people "who have" those "who may", "Solar race ". 










If the theme is the "golden age" of which in one form or another referred to in various traditions, was the recollection of a loop of the 
race, then at the same time we can talk about the super-historical understanding of this race, its functions and its location. What 



was once clear, over time it became more and more hidden. In view of the progressive involution of humanity, which is also known 



to many traditions, and influence the function of this race became gradually visible, and direct contact between the historical and 
super-historical elements broke. It is in this sense should be understood, for example, the doctrine of Hesiod, asserts that there is 
no golden age the original died, but were invisible leaders smertnyhl . Topic of the golden age gradually shifted to the topic of the 
metaphysical realm, in the mysterious, objective and ontological contact which consisted of all high potentates - as those who can 
be considered the real heirs of the primordial tradition, and those who knowingly and with greater or lesser degree of perfection is 
reproduced metaphysical realm of certain lands and certain forms of civilization, in a type of sacred empire, regnum. 













This is recorded in the traditional concept of the "King of Kings," "Universal Lord," "King of the World" and its associated characters, 
some of which are based on direct analogies, while others are mythologized memories of the land or lands, where it flowed the 
original Olympic cycle. 






These characters are primarily express the idea of "centrality": center pole, the center regions of the world, the central stone or 
stone, which lies at the heart of the magnet. Further, they emphasize the "stability": the island in the middle of water, rock, 
indestructible stone. And also the characters' invincibility and inaccessibility ": invisible castle or country to which it is impossible to 
find a road, a high mountain, covered with forests; underground cities. You will often find in this context, images of the "Light of the 
Earth," "Land of the Living," "Holy Land", and a variety of variations of "cimvolizma gold", which is also closely linked with the ideas 
of sunshine, light, royalty, and the inviolability of immortality. All this is necessarily relevant to the primordial tradition and the 
century-called golden. Other symbols refer us to the idea of "Life" in the highest sense of the word ("eternal food," "The Tree of 
Life"), the transcendental knowledge, the invincible force, and all these images are combined in various combinations in the 
fantastic, the symbolic and poetic descriptions of different tradition of the invisible kingdom, regnum, "top center of the world" - or 
himself, or of its various forms and emanatsiy2. Chapter 2. "Hero" and "Lady" 





is we said, the doctrine of the golden age is part of the doctrine of the four centuries that tells us about progressive spiritual 
involution occurring in the course of history, from the most ancient times. Each of these ages, however, has a morphological sense, 
is typical and universal form of civilization. After the golden age of silver should be corresponding to the type of priestly spirituality, 
more feminine than masculine: we call it the "Moon" spirituality, as a symbolic silver to gold is like the moon to the sun: the moon, 
unlike the sun - it's feminine luminary not having in itself the source of its own light. Hence the shift to spirituality, mediating function 
due to the extroverted spirituality, characterized by "devotsionalnostyu 'rejection of his self, passionate and sacrificial ecstasy. Here 
we are faced with the origins of the "religious" (in the strict sense of the word) phenomenon, in his ecstatic devotsionalnyh, mystical 
variations. 




Then the wild and materialized masculinity raised against this form of spirituality, and this is the archetype of the Bronze Age. Here 
is a degradation of the warrior caste, and their rebellion against the spiritual caste, which in itself is no longer Olympic divine caste 
of rulers, but only a set of priests. Rebellious soldiers peculiar rejection of priestly principles, pride, violence and militancy. The myth 
that corresponds to this period - Luciferian or titanic revolt prometeicheskoe desire to usurp the Olympic flame. It's - the era of 
"Titans", the era of the Wolf, the era of "elemental beings" whose memory is preserved in the traditions of separate fragments of 
legends and epics of various peoples. 





The last century - it's "Iron Age" or, in terms of the Hindu tradition, the "dark age". Appears desakralizirovannaya civilization, 
knowing and glorifying only the earthly and human. In contrast to the decline of this form arises the idea of a possible restoration of 
the cycle, which Hesiod calls the "cycle of heroes" or "age of heroes." In this case, the term "hero" should be viewed in a narrow, 
purely technical and non-conventional sense. According to Hesiod, a "generation of heroes" is generated by Zeus, that is the 
Olympic principle of how to restore the primordial state and give birth to a new "golden" veku3. But to realize this possibility, which 
remains only a possibility, and not due to a natural stage that must be overcome and the "moon" priestly spirituality, but also the 
status of a simple soldier, and titanium. These features can be seen in all the "heroic" figures very different traditions. It is in these 
terms Achaean-Hellenic tradition described the Hercules prototype "Hero." His main enemy was Hera, the main figure lunar- 
pantheistic worship. Hercules reached the Olympic immortality, becoming an ally of Zeus, the Olympic principle, in the war with the 
"giants": and according to one of the myths of Hercules through the cycle "titanic" element (Prometheus) was released and 
reconciled with the element of Olympic. 





If you mean by "titan" who do not want to recognize the limitations of the human condition and tries to steal the divine fire, the 
"hero" from the "Titanium" distinguishes only one stroke. Pindar has already warned against the desire to "become as gods," and in 
Hebrew mythology curse of Adam is a similar warning, pointing also to the riskiness of such an attempt. Type Titanium - or a 
different perspective, the type of soldier - is, in fact, the first matter of character. However, for a positive solution, that is, for the 
Olympic transformation and reintegration into the original state, you must perform a double condition. 



First of all: a test confirmation and masculine skills - from a whole series of adventures, adventures, encounters - but in a form that 
is not an end in itself, lest there be clogging the "I" in order not to paralyze the ability to open itself to the transcendent power, only 
through which the fire and may turn into a light and free. On the other hand, the exemption should not mean the end of the internal 
stress, as a further test is an adequate statement on the quality of male supernatural level, which should lead to the Olympic 
transformation, to the attainment of dignity, which is always in the initiatory tradition called the "royal". It is here that is radically 
different from the heroic experience of mystical ecstasies and pantheistic exaltation. And here it should be remembered first and 
foremost about the symbolism of "women". 




In the Indo-Aryan tradition, each "god" - that is, each of the transcendent principle - has a "wife", called the term "shakti", which also 
means "power." In the West, Wisdom, Sophia, and sometimes the Holy Spirit himself, acted as the images of the Virgin regal. And 
in this wife, the goddess Hebe Hercules is also the goddess of eternal youth Olympics. In the Egyptian depictions give women the 
divine king of the lotus, a symbol of new birth, and the "key of life." Nordic Valkyrie, as well as Iranian fravarti were images of the 
transcendent levels themselves soldiers, by their lives and their victories. Roman tradition knew Venus Victrix (Venus wins), which 
is considered "ancestor" of the imperial kind (Venus Genitrix - Venus ancestor). The Celtic tradition also tells of supernatural 
women, which give the characters on a mysterious island to his love to make them immortal. Eve, according to etymology, means 
"life", "living". In order not to continue the chain of examples, we have developed more fully in another knige4, we note only that the 
widespread symbolism makes the "woman" image of life-giving and transforming power, which can be realized by overcoming a 
purely human condition. But why is this force is represented by a "woman"? This symbolism is based on analogy. It should start 
from the relationship between a man and a woman. These relations can be normal and abnormal. They are abnormal, when a 
woman becomes a mistress of a man. The symbolism associated with this incident was not related to our main theme. We only 
note that in this scenario we are talking about gynecological cratic (matriarchal) concepts, which are remnants of the loop "lunar" 
and reflect the theme of human dependence and passivity of men in relation to the spirit, understood as a female element (Cosmic 
Mother, Magna Mater, Mother of Life and so on) - a theme that is characteristic for the second, Silver Age. 







However, this concept does not fit the more general idea of woman as hostess of the sacred, sacrum, as the animating principle, as 
the bearer of "life", liberating, inspiring and transforming the usual "entity." This idea may enter, and in fact is, in the context of 
spirituality, which we call the "heroic." In this case, we are looking for analogies and symbols should refer to the normal relations 
between men and women, based on the fundamental concept of the masculine preserve its own nature. The spirit in the face of 
machismo - a "woman": the man is active, passive spirit - even when confronted with the transforming and vivified by his power, the 
hero saves the position of a man, husband, lord and master women, wives. Note along the way, that is considered the opposite of 
symbolism symbolism is prevalent in the mystics and religious orientation among the authors, especially Christian, where the soul 
itself often plays the role of women, the role of "bride". 




Comparing this with the "signs" the center, we obtain a composite character: the Virgin Islands, the Virgin Tree, Virgin Spring, 
Mistress or Queen of the Castle, the Queen of the Earth Solar, a virgin, hidden in the stone and so on. In particular, as a Widow, a 
woman is a silent closure, abandonment, that is, tradition, strength or potency, which no one has more, who lost her "husband", 
"man", and now awaits a new master or geroya5: same value and imprisoned in the dungeon of the Virgin, who is waiting for a 
wedding and designed with the fate of the knight. On this basis, all that is said in the epic tales of chivalry and stories about the 
adventures and heroic battles, perfect for fidelity to the "Lady" and hoping to have it, you can tell how the symbolism of masculine 
qualities tests, tests required as a preliminary stage of transcendental integration the individual. And if in this literature, there are 
female characters in the subject matter of temptations and dangers for the hero, it should not be interpreted straightforwardly and 
unambiguously, that is, if it was merely a carnal temptation, but in a higher sense - as a danger for the hero to fall into the "titanic 
"during his exploits. In this case the woman is a temptation coming from the transcendent power and knowledge, if possession has 
the features prometeicheskoy usurpation or greedy pride. In the other version and it could be that someone has identified the 
following words - "sucking death, coming from a woman," then there is the possibility of losing the very basis of the deep masculine 




Chapter 3. Hyperborean theme 







Another indication of the fundamental traditions, we have analyzed with the necessary references and details in other knige6, the 
localization of the original location of the center or "Olympic" Golden Age civilization in the "northern polar regions," which 
subsequently became uninhabitable. Hyperborean tradition of origin, both in its original Olympic form and in its restoration "heroic" 
type, was at the heart of the civilizing of races, which in the period between the end of the era and the beginning of glatsialnoy 
Neolithic spread of the Eurasian continent. Some branches of this race came directly from the North. Others had their homeland of 
Western Atlantic lands, where it was created something like a copy of a purely Nordic Center. That is why the various overlapping 
characters, in fact and legend, sometimes referred to the North of the Arctic land, and sometimes - on the west. 



Thus, different name Hyperborean center were moved to the center of the Atlantic: Thule, White Island, Shining Isle - Hindu cveta- 
dvipa, Greek island Leuke7 - "the original homeland of the Aryan race" - aryanem-vaejo - Land of the Sun, Earth, Apollo, the island 
of Avalon. In all Indo-European traditions of identical stories describe the loss of this country, which became In consequence of 
mythological reasons - glaciers, flood - out of reach. This is a real historical fact, reflected in many of the concepts of tradition, 
speaking of something lost, hidden or become inaccessible. For the same reason "The Island" or "Land of the Living" - a "living" in 
the highest sense of the word should be understood as representatives of the original divine race - that is, the territory to which a 
greater or lesser extent, are all symbols of the higher centers of the world, often is also "the land of the dead," and "dead" here 
called the representatives of the scattered races. For example, according to the Celtic doctrine, ancestors of people had a God 
Dead Dispater, living in the remote region on the other side of the ocean, the "Island Reach," where according to legend came the 
Druids of the prehistoric inhabitants of Gallii8. In addition, the classical tradition claims that the former Lord of the Earth once the 
king of the Golden Age, Cronus-Saturn, thrown from the throne and castrated (that is, devoid of the ability to "generate", giving birth 
to a new offspring), is still alive and lives "in a dream" in the far northern region of the Arctic Sea, which for this reason is called 
Kronidskoe more9. All this has led to numerous lead to confusion, but, in fact, in such cases, the ideas associated with the 
Hyperborean theme, or simply transferred to the level of super-history, or attached to the general concept of the hidden and unseen 
spiritual center. In our case, we must consider briefly on the forms in which this theme appears in the Celtic (and especially the 
Irish) cycle. We are talking primarily about the traditions associated with Avallone, with the Tuatha de Danann, as well as with King 



A, 



rthur. 



The significance of these traditions is not a purely local and historical. And geographic data in this case, as in many others, have 
only symbolic meaning. 





chapter 4. Tradition in Ireland 



The legendary history of Ireland is focused on the change of races, which in turn conquered and subjecting her, coming from the 
mysterious North Atlantic Center, where sometimes they come back. "Historia Britorum" ("History of British") gives the name of this 
center, "Hyperborea", but really, this is just a mythological Irish translation of the words: mag-mo, trag-mor, or mag-mell, which 
mean "the land of the dead," the primordial North Atlantic tsentrlO. These races make a lot of feats: they are constantly at war with 
Fomhoire, giants or dark monstrous creatures that legends Christianized forms of antediluvian giants identified with the 
descendants of Ham, or wild and Kainal 1 . These are the equivalent Fomhoires "beings elements" or "giants", against which the 
Nordic tradition Edda fight Asa "divine heroes." They represent the power cycle "Bronze Age", the dark telluric forces associated 
with water depths (in a cycle of Ulster), like the god Poseidon telluric. This applies to materialize and degraded in the direction of 
titanic forces of the primordial age. The last remark is about the fundamental forces of these degraded in the Celtic tradition, 
exemplified by the fact that the king Fomhoire, Tetra, also came from the lands lying on that side of the ocean, and that 
inaccessible tower Conn, another king Fomhoire is on the "glass island in the middle of the ocean" and this obviously is nothing like 
the name of the primordial center of tradition. 





In any case, Fomhoires, in their essential aspects of the "dark" telluric race, place of the original group, who came to Ireland from 
the Atlantic region, and race are Partolona. This race is gradually fading, and in Ireland there is a new nation, which has also the 
origin as the first - a race Neymheydha. The name "Neymheydh" comes from the Celtic word "heaven" and "ancient" 12, and this 
new cycle can be defined as an invasion of Representatives primordial tradition, preserved in a more pure "Olympic" state. In an 
era Neymhedha the symbolic, which is an analog and Edda. In the Edda Asa "divine heroes," approached "creatures of the 
elements" with a request for them to build a fortress in the "central region", the city of Asgard to earth Mitgard. As payment for the 
work of giants demanded his "divine woman," Freyja, and besides, "the moon and the sun." Do not get what you want as Asa did 
not allow the usurpation of the powers beings belonging to the lower elements, - Giants started the war, which resulted fatally, to 
the "twilight of the gods." Similarly, in the Irish series Neymheydh Fomhoire used to build a fortress, but then, frightened, as if they 
themselves were not conquered it, he destroyed ee13. But this did not prevent the fact that the descendants of Neymhedha yet 
been enslaved Fomhoire who lived in the Tor-INIS, in a fortress on an island to the north-west of Ireland. And after that, after an 
attempt to rebel, they were finally exterminated Fomhoire, just as in the sagas Eddie Aces struggle against the forces of the 
elements ending twilight of the gods, the /Esir sunset. It seems that in both cases we are dealing with a description of the beginning 
of "Titanic" cycle on the ruins of civilization, the right belongs to primordial era. 




In the development of the Irish sagas mention an attempt to "heroic" restoration. We are talking about the cycle of the Tuatha de 
Danann, and this expression can be translated as "people of the goddess Anu or Danu" 14. On this race says that she came to 
Ireland, "from heaven" - hence "the wisdom and superiority of their knowledge," says Chronicle "Leabbar na hvidhe" 15. On the 
other hand, indicated that they had acquired supernatural knowledge of Hyperborean regione16. Both versions are not 
contradictory, but rather complement each other, as over-emphasizing the human nature of the primordial center and connection 
with the last race Tuatha surviving descendants of the race Neymheydha who retired to the Hyperborean or North -Atlantic regions 
to learn weird science - from their approach to some mystical objects. But on these subjects will be discussed: 17. Since 
Neymheydha race is a "heavenly" and "old" race, whose reign ended with the beginning of a titanic cycle, the entire plot of the 



relationship with the descendants of the Tuatha Neymheydha can be understood as a description of the reintegration of contact 
with the original spiritual center - the air, and in the geographic projection of the Hyperborean or Atlantic West - contact, revitalize 
and gave a heroic form of a new genus, the Tuatha de Danann18 who won again Fomhoire and near-race - Fir Bolg - and took 
possession of Ireland. The head of the Tuatha, OGM - is "sunny" character - Grian Ayneh - with features that brings him to the 
ancient Hercules. He seized the sword of King Fomhoire. 





But the rule of the Tuatha came to an end. Lebor Gabala ("Book of Conquest") tells of the arrival in Ireland of a new race, race 
"Mileadha sons" whose nature remains unclear. In the predominantly military aspect - the word "Mileadh" probably has the same 
root as the Latin miles, "soldier", 19 - who has, however, due to higher residual tradition, the previous cycle Tuatha de Danann. 
Thus, in the civilization continues to exist Mileadha symbolism of the "central region": these people is structured feudal order, with 
the highest royal authority, located at Tara, "middle ground" - Meadhom - previously the former as a sacred center of the Tuatha. 
The king was devoted to the kingdom in "stone of destiny" - lia-fail, "Lia Fail," which we will discuss below, which also belonged to 
the tradition of Tuata20. As for themselves the Tuatha, they, according to some texts, left the country and become invisible 
inhabitants of the wonderful "underground" palaces or inaccessible to people of the mountain caves, appearing among the people 
only in exceptional cases. Other texts say that they returned to their original homeland, the island Avallon21 . That said, both 
versions are mutually beneficial, since it is only the notation of the two possible primordial center became hidden ("underground"), 
and inaccessible. Celtic traditions represent the center as an Atlantic island, "Avallon", and it is important to note that the later the 
island was represented as a place where women are attracted to the characters to make them immortal. The word "Avallon" comes 
from the word kimriyskogo afal, ie, the "apple", and so Avallon - this "island of apples" 22. This, of course, reminds us of the island 
of the Hesperides, "the other side of the Ocean" and the symbolism of the "golden" apples that Hercules was, having carried out 
one of the feats, and that gave him the Olympic immortality. Supernatural women of the island have the ability to grant Avallon 
"salvation" - and in the saga of Tir-nan-Aage, they claim that their land is not "no death, no decomposition of bodies," and that there 
Oyzin hero be able to purchase "the crown of eternal youth" 23. But at the same time Avallon, "White Island" 24, also means "polar" 
or "solar", "sunny" island. "The Island of Avallon," according to another possible etymology, in fact, is "an island of Apollo," God, 
whose name was Celtic Ablun or Belen. And in this case refers to "sunny" and Hyperborean region, as Apollo is the sun king of the 
golden age and Hyperborean regionov25. If the island is sometimes confused with the "glass island", this is due to the proximity of 
their symbolism, because, generally speaking, walls of glass (sometimes from the air) often symbolize an invisible protection, 
guarding some of the places to which access is closed. In some cases, it is expressed in the symbol rotating around the island of 
fiery wheels. This - the idea of options is not available, always associated with a higher center. 






The text, known as the Battle of Mag-Tured ("The Battle of Mag-Turede"), mentions that the Tuatha brought with them from the 
North Atlantic homeland four subjects directly related to the teaching received in this country: stone, spear, sword and the vessel. 
Stone called the "stone of destiny" or "royal stone" because it served as an oracle and let you know who, in turn, should be the 
rightful king. Javelin - a "Spear Meadows", the god of lightning, which stated: "Who has this spear, do not lose a single battle." The 
Sword - is invincible and indestructible sword Nuadha And, finally, the vessel - a vessel of the Dagda, Dagda boiler, able to feed 
your content any number of soldiers. These items are the Tuatha de Danann appear again in the images of the corresponding 
items of the Grail cycle, just like the location of the Grail is closely linked to the same island of Avallon, from the "White Island". 




In the traditions collected in the "Annals of the Four Masters," is particularly evident theme of struggle and victory, understood as a 
particular challenge. It is often repeated formula: "The King-so devastated such a time, in turn, became the king" 26. The most 
profound meaning of this, a legend about a king in the Nemean forest, as we discussed in another place. The victory over a 
particular character, culminating in his assassination, is a condition to take over the royal and priestly functions inherent in earlier 
this character. Something similar is also needed to become a husband, "Divine Women" 27. Medieval knight's literature is full of 
different variants of this theme: the test of battle leads almost automatically to the possession of a lady, passing from one character 
to another. On the basis of so nazyvemogo "right love," and in accordance with the ethics of this literature was quite natural, when 
Knight chose as the object of his desire to Damu's own master, believing himself stronger than he is in battle and being able to 
prove it dele28. Particularly odd about all this, if you accept everything literally, is an almost complete departure from reality existed 
in that era mores, and that alone would have to reveal the true meaning contained in the description of all these "adventures" 29: 
obviously, that they appeared distant echoes of the theme selection on male qualities necessary for the possession of "the divine 
woman." 




According to "The History of British Kings" ("Historia Regum Britanniae") lived in Britain before the giants. Their leader was called 
Goemagog. "Brutus" was considered a descendant of the Trojans, who founded Rome, destroyed the giants, and laid the 
foundations of the British traditsii30. Goemagog - the equivalent of Gog and Magog. Such a biblical parallel is very revealing. Gogi 
and Magog - is demonic hordes, always playing, as we shall see below, an important role in the imperial myth. They correspond to 
Fomhoire, "creatures of the elements" or rintursam that Asa "divine heroes of the Edda," blocked the way to the wall "place of the 
middle" - Mitgardu, that is the image of the primordial center. In a sense, these characters represent the demonic world of mass. 



"Annals of the Four Masters" often refer to the uprising against the sacred dynasty of the Tuatha de Danann, as well as against the 
subsequent military dynasty sons Mileadha - uprising organized by a race of the Fir-Domhnain or "race depths" of the telluric race 
associated with the degenerated remains of the first inhabitants of Ireland, a fir-Bulg. Also, sometimes it comes to "race plebeian" - 
aithe-ach-tuatha-, which, taking advantage of the holiday, killed and forced the lords of the Four Lords revolt against the high king, 
dwelling in the "Mid-point" 30a. But as a punishment for this crime in the country hit by the general infertility, together with other 
misfortunes: and all the kingdom is doomed to remain in that state until the last king's son, defeated and killed, would not return to 
earth ottsov31. However, in the eastern legend of Alexander the Great and the devastation issyhanie "all the rivers, until there is no 
source", is associated with the time of the arrival of hordes Gogov and Magogov32. In the same conditions and the kingdom of 
ends Holy Grail, which turned into "Gaste Terre", "desolate earth" due to "deplorable crime," and will continue until the arrival of the 
hero-avenger, hero of the reducing agent. In all this, as well as in other ancient pre-Christian Celtic traditions and symbols are the 
all the major themes that were later embodied in the legend of the Grail. The final link in this chain - the legend of King Arthur. 





Chapter 5. Cycle of legends about King Arthur 

In all tissues of the legend, the historical reality of Arthur - who was dux bellorum (military leader) of northern Kimry in their fight 
against the Anglo-Saxons between V and VI centuries BC - Recedes into the background in the face of the fact that his reign was 
the archetype of the royal power, directly related to the Hyperborean tradition. In the end, the reign of King Arthur was actually 
expressing a paradigm of sacred royal power, expressed in symbolic and super-historical complex. Thus, the historical link with 
Britain Arthur's kingdom receded into the background. In medieval literature, this kingdom has more supranational character and 
combines the best of knights, regardless of their nationality, and the influence of these traditions in medieval heroic Christianity was 
so strong that everyone would like to see Arthur in their symbolic leader. And highly telling that every knight of the period aspired to 
become a member of the Order of the mysterious "King Arthur". 








The name "Arthur" lends itself to varying interpretations, but the most probable one is the one that elevates the name to the Celtic 
word arthos - Bear and viros - chelovek33. Nenny already knew about the existence of such an interpretation: Artur latine sonat 
ursum horribilem ("Arthur in Latin, so scary bear") 34. This means virility, which is dire, but at the same time, the name associated 
with the symbolism of the Hyperborean, and again refers to the idea of a central or "polar" royal functions. Bear - this is one of the 
sacred symbols of ancient Nordic cult, and at the same time, the astronomical symbolism it represents one of the "polar" 
constellations (Big Dipper). But that's not all: in a mixture of traditional texts, symbols and names you can see the connection 
between this constellation (together with its associated characters and the pole center) and the Thule name, meaning "White 
Island" Hyperboreans, the center of primordial traditsii35. In the figure of Arthur converge so "polar" element, the element and the 
element of Hyperborean regal, royal. Exclusively male and purely military character of Arthur as "a terrible bear" (ursus horribilis) 
compensated for and balanced by the fact that Arthur is always as it is accompanied by complementary component Mirddhin or 
Merlin, curator of supernatural knowledge and super-material power, revealing not so much an individual person, as the 
personification of the transcendent and the spiritual side of the Artura36. The close connection between these two principles - 
military and spiritual - is characteristic of "chivalry" of Camelot, and it is this feature determines the meaning of his deeds 
committed. Chivalry Round Table, that is King Arthur, is not only a military organization. - "Those who elected to be members of 
chivalry, - we read in Malory in" Death of King Arthur, "37, - feel more oblagodetelstvovanymi and highly esteemed than those who 
got the whole world. And they leave their parents, their fathers, their wives and their children to follow the Order. " Grail itself is the 
one transcendental element with which the knights must reach its fullness and perfection of his: and this is clearly seen in those 
versions of legends, where the kingdom of Arthur directly identified with the kingdom of the Grail. It should be recalled episode 
associated with the stones of Stonehenge - the stones that still exist today and do not cease to amaze many of its secrets - how 
could such a long period to handle and install in the order in which they stand still and Segonde, these giant blocks, which are the 
remains of the ancient pre-Neolithic sun temple? Merlin, ordering the soldiers to go and bring the distant mountains these huge 
stones, said, "to do anything, brave warriors, and find out, bringing the stones," which is more powerful - the spirit, or a simple 
power. '" The soldiers could not do it, and then Merlin himself, smiling easily implemented this zadachu38. The fact that a purely 
military virtue in a cycle of legends about King Arthur is connected directly to the spirit, also stresses the following instruction 
contained in the "History of British Kings" ("Historia Regum Britannian"): "Fight for your land and take, if it happens, the death of: 
since death - is a victory and the liberation of the soul "39. This corresponds exactly to the classical concept mors triumphalis, 
"conquering death", the central position of the whole of ethics inherent in the traditions of "heroic" type. 








According to legend, Arthur proved his birthright to be the legitimate king of all England, to withstand the "test of the sword", ie 
being able to pull the sword sticking out of a square stone, put on the altar of the church. This stone is a variant of "Stone of Kings", 
belonging to the ancient tradition of the Tuatha da Danann40. Here we are faced with a double, but a fairly uniform symbolism. On 
the one hand, it is - the general symbolism of the "stone lying at the base," which recalls the idea of a "pole", where - and allegory 
and myth, pointing to the removal of male power (the sword) is from the polar principle. On the other hand, pull the sword from the 
stone also means free from the shackles of materiality because, as the stone often means precisely this materiality. This is 
confirmed by another episode where Arthur, led by Merlin becomes the owner of the sword Excalibur Kalibum or who held over the 
waters of a mysterious ruka41 . About this weapon is said that it was made on the island of Avallon, that is what it has to do with 
"high center." And the fact that the sword held above the water, again emphasizes that it is a force-free conditions of the material, 
limited and sensual life, which has always had a direct bearing on the fundamental aspect of the symbolism of water. To overcome 



this life to all those who want to receive the royal "mandate" from the "center" and to, in order to become king and lord in the 
highest sense of those words. But the same need to implement those knights who want to belong to the retinue of King Arthur and, 
eventually, to find the Grail. 








Among the motifs characteristic of the British tradition, we mention yet those associated with the symbolism of the Round Table and 
Arthur's seat. We select special characters not available to the earth: the kingdom of Arthur, according to Andrea Kappellano, 
separated from the world wide flow of people through which spanned only a narrow bridge, full of dangers. This realm is guarded by 
giants, and in the middle of it is constantly rotating zamok42. In this castle, known as the "royal palace" - caer rigor - or "lock-rich" - 
caer golud - kept the supernatural vessel reclaimed King Arthur (according to tradition, "The spoiling of Annwn") from the king of 
"another world". This vessel is the equivalent of one of the characters Hyperborean tradition of the Tuatha da Danann (vessel 
Dagda), and like the Grail in the castle of the "rich" of the king, he is able to "saturate" any number of people with food, heal all 
wounds and protect against the effects of time, denying their gifts only mean and klyatvoprestupnikam43. The image of the rotating 
lock - revolving castel, caer sidi - identical "rotating island", which in ancient Celtic saga sometimes replaces the "Island of Glass" 
and he Avallon. It obviously contains the reference to "Polar Earth" orbiting the earth's axis and its rotation in involving the whole 
world, all this brings to mind the image of the "Universal Lord", Chakravarty, "rotating wheel", who, being a real center, turns the 
wheel of the kingdom , regnum, and directs all of the ordered universe. These ideas are, and for the symbolism of the Round Table, 
who established on the advice of Arthur, "Merlin" to establish Knights, whose head he was sam44. According to the text Malory, 
The Round Table was created in the world and it was reproduced by the whole universe, heaven and zemlya45. In other tekstah42 
mentions of the stars and the rotation of the heavens about a fixed point from which it appears that the knights of the Round Table 
seated, are the highest representatives of the central government. Now it is important to point out that in a variety of tales knights of 
the Round Table (or at least the best of them) appear in the number "twelve", which is obviously close to the twelve peers, of the 
"Roman de Brut," "which divided the land into 12 parts, did every one of them feud, and called the kings of "46. The importance of 
this feature is that 12 - is a solar number, which is always in some form appears where formed or already formed tradition of sacred 
center: 12 electrons Midgard, 12 higher gods of Olympus, 12 wooden poles in the Delphic sanctuary of Apollo, 12 lictors of Rome, 
12 residents Avallone, 12 elected by the heirs of Charlemagne, and so on. But in the history of the Grail and King Arthur, this 
symbolism is also associated with subsequent motif of the "dangerous place". This is - left empty seat at the round table, designed 
for the expected favorite knight, surpassing all others, which should become "thirteenth" knight. This clearly meets the thirteenth in 
this case, the most senior governor of the center, the Lord of the Pole and all the other twelve, the image of the Chakravarty, "King 
of the World" 47. 







Of course, when talking about "dangerous place", understood as the space left blank, you should see this as an allusion to the 
involution of the kingdom of Arthur, or the degradation of its rulers, as is emphasized the need to restore something lost. Ideally, at 



this time the Knights and the Round Table have to go searching for the Holy Grail. In medieval literature search through the Grail 
knights and adventures of King Arthur is inextricably intertwined with each other. In this case, the kingdom of Arthur's kingdom is 
identified usually with Lokrisa or Logresa - that is the ancient name of England, "Albania" or "White Island", a resident of the Grail. 
And Arthur's knights embark in search of the Grail in order to return to this realm of its former glory and destroy the evil spell that 
hit, according to Mabiskogianu on this earth. Grail - a symbol of what has been lost, but that is to be found again. One person 
should return the Grail all his qualities, and it is then knighthood and takes "a dangerous place." 










Here we can observe a splitting of the figure of King Arthur. On the one hand, there is a super-historical "King Arthur", symbolizing 
a certain mission. On the other hand, there is a King Arthur as a kind of historical representative of this mission, participating in 
events similar to the ancient stories of the destruction and scattering of the Tuatha De Danann and their descendants. But not to 
get ahead, we recall only the epilogue of the ancient legend of Arthur, in which we are again confronted with the symbolism of a 



woman. 




Two characters tend to deprive Arthur of his "Lady" - Kvennuvar, Ginevra (the name means "white spirit", which once again 
emphasizes the symbolic nature of the image). First - it Melvas who is taking her to his city Glastonberi, identified with the sea "City 
of Glass" and Avallone - Glastonia est urbs vitrea - etiam insula Avalloniae celebriter nominatur48. (Glastoniya - this glass city, also 
called the famous "Avallon"). As a result, "Glass Island" being besieged, and finally it ends in a truce. It intervenes in the legend of 
the Christian element, since Arthur gave the island as a fief of the Church representative, ensuring its safety. In fact, we are talking 
about trying to replace the Christian tradition, a tradition of Celtic-Hyperborean, absorbing all its most important themes. 
Glastonberi was one of the main centers of Christianity in England, and to preserve the sacred prestige Glastonberi, Christianity 
has sought to incorporate in a Christianized form of ancient Nordic-Celtic tradition, attributing the Christian church of the ancient 
sacred significance Avallone. "Glastoniya ie Glastonberi - provides a basic text in this regard," De antiquitate Glastoniensis 
Ecclesiae "(" On the Antiquities Glastonberiyskoy church ") - formerly known as ygnis gutrin, ygnes in Breton means the island, 
insula, a gutrin," glass " , vitrea. With the advent of the British is the place became known as Glastiburi of glas - glass, vitrum, and 
buria - city, civitas, Glastiberia49. History of the transfer of the island by Arthur Church serves as a confirmation of the "traditional 
continuity" trumped-Christian "evangelizers." But this is not limited to: referring to the tragic epilogue of the ancient legend, it was 
announced that King Arthur had died and his tomb is in Glastonberi. Thus, the ancient center is preserved, acquired, however, the 
new value - the value of the center of Christian missionary work in England. 






n the second version of the story of "Lady" King Arthur said that while Arthur was in the campaign, creating a legendary world 
empire and conquering Rome to be crowned in this holy city, his nephew Modred, remaining at home, seized the throne and took 
possession of "Lady" Arthur, Guinevere. In the ensuing war, the traitor was killed, but also fell and the best knights of the Round 
Table. Arthur himself was mortally wounded and moved to Avallon, where the charms of women of this land and especially 
Morgandy ("Born of the Sea") heal him and allow him again to perform his sacred funktsii50. But the wounds of King Arthur 
(especially, according to some sources, one wound - from poisoned spears) each year are now open, and loyal people waiting in 
vain for his return. However, today the tradition is still alive, according to which once King Arthur still reappears from the island of 
Avallon and lead his kingdom: why some Britons up until this time did not want more to choose their own koroley51 . In other forms 
of legends - such as "Otia Imperialia" Dzhervezi of Tilberi - Arthur describes lying in bed in a fairy palace on the hill. According to 
another version, the emphasis of the Christian, he "died", and his body buried in the abbey Glastonberi, which as we saw, wanted 
to identify himself with the very Avallone. 







All these data should be referred to a period of crisis or mezhdutsarstvovaniya, after which the search should begin Grail. Here, we 
now come to another fundamental cycle for the Grail theme topic wounded King, who resides in a mysterious and inaccessible 
place, waiting for a cure, then to "come back". We also recall another ancient Celtic sagas theme - the theme of the kingdom, is 
doomed to sterility and devastation as a result of the revolt the mob or as a result of wounds from spears or flaming sword, received 
one of its rulers. 







Chapter 6. Imperial legend - Master of the Universe 







According to the above, the legend of King Arthur is one of the many forms of common myths about the invisible universal emperor 
and ruler, as well as its manifestations. This theme arises from the most remote antiquity, and it is closely connected with the 
doctrine of "cyclical manifestations', an avatar, that is, with the appearance at certain times and in different forms of a single 
principle, which in the interim periods resides in a hidden, unmanifest sostoyanii52. Thus, this governor has all the distinguishing 
features of the incarnation of the Principle; legend through various images necessarily emphasizes that he "dies", that he only 
removed in a safe place where he once again appears, that he is "sleeping" and must sooner or later wake up. Thus, the super- 
historical element is superimposed on the historical element, turning into a symbol of the identity of the real ruler, the king. 
Sometimes the name of a man is saved, but it does mean is something transcendent in relation to itself. 






The image of the king, who fell into "sleep" or lethargic, like a different way - the King of Changeling, impaired or paralyzed, 
although it should always refer only to the external members of the sacred history of the royal authority, and not to samommu 
inviolable principle. Hence the theme of the wounded, crippled, impotent king, who continues to live in reach of the "Center", where 
o power laws of time or death. 



n< 




In order not to repeat everything that we said in another place on this issue by developing a sufficiently complex and universal 
context of this problem, we recall only some of the typical ways in which the most ancient times like the symbolism found its 
xpression. 






e, 





ita 



In the Hindu tradition, we are faced with the theme Mahakashipy who sleeps in the mountain, but I must wake up, when zaduyut in 
the shell at the time of a new manifestation of the principle, already previously discovered itself in the form of Buddha. This period is 
also a time coming "Ruler of the Universe", Chakravarty, bearing the name "Shankha" but the word "shankha" in Sanskrit means 
"shell", what is manifested through verbal assimilation of the idea of waking from a dream of a new manifestation of the "King of the 
World" and the most primordial tradition, which, according to the same Hindu doctrine, is hidden in the intermediate times of crisis it 
is inside the "shell". A similar Iranian tradition tells of a hero Kersaspa, who, being wounded by an arrow during a "sleep" (again, 
the same character!), Survived in a lethargic state of the century, surrounded by caring for them fravarti women (just as the 
wounded King Arthur continues to live on Island women who own the Healing Art). But wake up in the era of Kersaspa Saoshyanta 
and will fight with him in his voyske53. Saoshyant - a ruler of the future triumph of the kingdom of "God of Light," and the dark 
destroyer Ahrimanic forces. And here it should be noted that the Jewish concept of the "Messiah" and the Christian theory of the 
"kingdom of God," from which actually evolved directly medieval imperial myth, are merely echoes of this ancient ario-lranian pre- 
Christian tradition. 

But the most important statement of this motive is the doctrine of the Kalki-avatar associated with the history of Parasha Rama, one 
of the most typical images of the heroic line of primordial Olympic-Hyperborean tradition. When the ancestors of the Aryan colonists 
of India still remained in their northern homeland, Parasha Rama, his ax destroyed caste rebel soldiers, and also his mother sinned. 
It is these characters, as has been said to characterize the "heroic" spirit - overcoming a degraded manhood and spirituality posed 






by maternal-feminine character In consequence the other varieties of involution and degradation - and it's especially important that 
the acts of Parasha Rama- refer to the period between the silver (ie lunar) and bronze (that is titanic) for centuries, between the 
Treta Yuga, Dwapara Yuga and. Parasha-frame is not dead, he retired to an ascetic monastery on the mountain Mahendra, where 
he lives vechno54. When it's the last time, in accordance with the laws of the cyclic manifestation of his new place in the form of the 
sacred king, who will win "dark age" and who will bear the name of "Kalki-avatara." Kalki is born to symbolically Shambhane, whose 
name in the Hindu and Tibetan traditions represents a sacred hyperborean tsentr55. Kalki is a spiritual teacher himself Parasha- 
Rama, and being initiated into the sacred science, Kalki becomes the regal dignity. Of Shiva, he gets a white winged horse (whose 
importance in the history of 10-th avatar is so important that sometimes the horse identified with the Kalka), and omniscient 
popugaya56 glowing sword. It should be remembered that King Arthur should also appear on a white horse, and that character 
plays an important role in the Apocalypse of St. St. John the Evangelist. In connection with King Arthur also said the missing sword, 
which again must go to King Arthur, and from time to time emerge from the water, emitting svet57. Driven by a bird, Kalki will find a 
"Lady", his wife, Padma, Padmavati, princess, which no one could have, as all the men who harassed her, according to the law of 
God's will turn into women. This character has a very deep meaning. Then, Kalki and his men crossed the sea without getting your 
feet wet as the sea in front of him magically to stone. Later he returned to his hometown in Shambhalu, which is so transfigured and 
radiant, it seemed to him the city of Indra, the King of Gods and Heroes of God. This - the symbol of a new manifestation of the 
primordial forces of the center, and here again the representatives of the solar and lunar dynasties, kings Maru and the Virgin, who 
by the power obtained by penances were able to save lives through all ages of the world, up to the "dark age", staying in the 
Himalayas, that is, in the mountains, a place of "endless continuation of the" Golden Age. Finally, there is a final battle, the battle of 
Kalka with a "dark age", personified in the goddess Kali, and the two leader of the demons - Cook and Vikoke58. This final battle 
will be particularly cruel, because the demons dwell in it will ever come to life again, barely touching the ground. But in the final 
Kalki still win pobedu59. 




All of these symbolic elements, is present in this story, and perhaps still not quite clear to the reader, we will explain later. Here we 
want to identify those aspects that could potentially different traditions are universal imperial myth of the new manifestation of the 
"kingdom", Regnum. In addition, it is important to clearly state the need to consider all the medieval forms of this myth in general 
and universal context, far exceeding the narrow limits of a strictly Christian ideas. However, even in the Roman era, in its imperial 
and pagan period, you can find some signs of awakening the idea of a golden age, the king and ruler of which, Kronos, as we have 
seen, ever considered living, but are able to sleep in the Hyperborean regions. In the August prophecy heralded the arrival of Sybil, 
"the ruler of the sun", rex a coelo or ex sole missus60 ("came down from heaven and sent the sun"), which referred to itself 
Goratsiy61 when he talked about the coming of God's Hyperborean golden age of Apollo. Vergiliy62 also proclaimed the nearness 
of a new golden age, the age of Apollo, and heroes. Emperor Augustus in this vein aware of their symbolic "genealogy" that comes 
from the Apollo and Phoenix, appearing frequently among the images of Adrian and Anthony also had a direct relation to the idea of 
the resurrection of the Roman era in the primordial Imperii63. That link Rome with super-historical and the metaphysical principle of 
the Empire, Imperium, - link, osnovyvavayuschayasya to the already mentioned possibility of transferring this very principle on 
certain of its manifestations in history - is the basis of the theory neprehodyaschesti and eternity (aeternitas) in Rome. 







In the Byzantine period the imperial myth Methodius received from a statement which, somehow accentuating his connection with 
Alexander the Great, once again refers to the above topics. Here again the motive is found the king, which was considered dead, 
but which came to life and founded a new Rome. After his short reign, there are hordes of Gog and Magog, Alexander of Macedon 
who once barred the way, and begin "final battle" 64. This form was received and widely developed mediaeval Ghibellines. 
Expected Emperor, hidden, but not dead, dwells in inaccessible and invisible center is transformed into one or another ruler of the 
Holy Roman Empire: Charlemagne, Frederick I, Frederick II. And the accompanying theme ruined and barren kingdom, awaiting 
restoration, finds its equivalent in "Dry Tree". Dry Tree, associated with the seat of the "King of the World," which we will discuss 
later, again at zazeleneet new imperial demonstrations and victory over the forces of the "dark age", submitted in accordance with 
the new religion in the biblical-Christian terms, that is, images of hordes of Gog and Magog, burst into the world in the era of 
Antihrista65. However, this does not prevent the fact that images of Frederick II or King Arthur, staying on the mountain, and the 
knights of King Arthur, escaping from the mountains to hunt wild bear in itself the elements associated with ancient Nordic-pagan 
concepts, from Valhalla as a mountain seat of Odin, the head of "divine heroes," 66, with units of spirits of heroes (Chosen 
"Dames," Valkyries), which turned into a suite of wildlife hunting, becoming a mystic army, Odin, called to join the final battle with 
ie "creatures of the elements." 




This legend in the era of the golden age of chivalry and western gibellinizma repeated with endless variations, and starting from the 
prophecies concerning the phenomenon of the "third Friedrich," it finds its final expression in the western formula of the Emperor, 
who "is alive and not alive": "Oculus eius morte claudet abscondita supervivetque, sonabit et in populis: vivit, non vivit, uno ex pullis 
pullisque pullorum superstite "(" It is a death bed having closed his eyes, still alive, he was asleep, and the most vulgar 
superstitions and primeval state that he lives and does not live ") 67. "He lives and lives" - this is the prophetic formula, medieval 
civilization in the period of its decline. The wounded king, the king who dwells in the lethargy, the king, died, and only seeming 
alive, or alive, but only seemingly dead, and so on - these are similar and interchangeable themes, which we constantly meet in a 
series of Grail inspired a special vitality and strength of recent high aspirations of the West to restore its sacred structure in 
accordance with the laws of the great, spiritual men, and traditionally imperial civilization. 



Chapter 7. Friedrich - John Priest - Imperial Tree 




In the old Italian novella stating that "Prester John, a noble lord Hindu", sent ambassadors to the Emperor Frederick as a "true 
mirror of the world, to see how he is wise in word and deed." Of "Prester John" "Frederick" (most likely, we are talking about 
Frederick II) were given three stones, and at the same time he was asked what is the best thing in the world. "The Emperor took the 
stones," and asked about their dignity. "On this question he replied that the best thing in the world - is a" measure ". From all this, 
Prester John concluded that" the emperor was wise in words, but not in affairs, because he did not ask about the dignity of stones, 
each of which was so valuable, "presbyter John thought," These stones are not being cognised by the Emperor, eventually lose 
their value, "and demanded them back. Especially valuable was one of the stones that could make it invisible, and which Prester 
John said that "it costs more than your whole Empire" 68. 







According to another legend, written by Oswald Schreiber, Frederick II of Prester John was a dress of fireproof salamander skin, 
the water of eternal youth and a ring with three stones, which makes it possible to live under water, to become invisible and 
invulnerable. Stones of Prester John is most often appear in the German texts, the period around the year 1300, together with 
references to strength, making nevidimym69. 





These legends are very important when we remember that the kingdom of Prester John - is not nothing but a medieval name 
"Supreme Sacred Center" 70. It was believed that the kingdom is in central Asia - or in Mongolia or India, or, finally, in Ethiopia, and 
this is the last name in those days meant not only the country now known by that name, but something else. Attributes ascribed to 
this reign, leaving no doubt as to its symbolic nature. "Gifts of Prester John," Emperor Frederick are a kind of external "mandate" 
proposed by the governor of the German Holy Roman Empire, so that he established contact with the real principle of "universal 
Master". The water of eternal youth means immortality. Fireproof dress reminiscent of the Phoenix is updated through the fire, 
which is likely to remain in it without any harm to himself. Ability to be invisible often represents an opportunity to have contact with 
the invisible and supersensible world, go into it. The ability to live under water, do not wallow in it, walk on it (this is reminiscent of 
walking on the waters of the Kalki-avatara, rising above the water sword of King Arthur, etc.) denotes a real connection with the 
principle of standing high above the world over, the flow of formation. In general, it is about pure skill initiatic type and potency 
associated with the higher initiation. 




In view of the foregoing, the Italian legend, apparently, the story of some inadequacy of Frederick for such a mandate. Frederick 
limit - it is the dignity of a knight and secular ruler of a purely temporary, as indicated by his response: "measure" - the best thing to 
svete71 . Frederick "did not ask the question," the question of the symbols of power, offered him a presbyter John. Due to lack of 
awareness of the meaning of the higher mandate, its effectiveness was now doomed to decay, so that Prester John, and took back 
the mandate. A special form of existence of the emperor, who "lives and not live," whose life - this is only an appearance, as well as 
the subject of the king, dwelling in a lethargic sleep, which is closely associated with the underlying motive of the stories of the Grail 
"with guilt, the essence of which lies in the absence of" the question, '"because the mere fact that such a statement would mean the 
beginning of the restoration. 

Add some detail to the description of the kingdom of Prester John. "Tractatus pulcherrimus" calls him "king of kings - rex regum". It 
combines the spiritual and secular vlast72 and can say of himself: "Johannes presbyter, divina gracia Dominus dominacium 
omnium, quae sub coelo sunt ab ortu solis usque ad paradisum terrestrem" ("Presbyter John, the grace of God, Lord of lords, who 
only have under the sky from sunrise to paradise on earth "). But essentially, "Prester John" - a title, a name that represents not an 
individual, and some sacred function. So, Wolfram von Eschenbach and "Titurel" we meet with the name "Prester John", taken as a 
title, and the Holy Grail itself, as we shall see, this will indicate who and in what order should become "the presbyter John." In 
various medieval legends "Prester John" constrains tribes Gogov and Magog and controls visible and invisible worlds (and natural, 
natural and supernatural, unseen beings), prevents the penetration of his kingdom "lions" and "giants." In this realm is also the 
"fountain of youth", and no wonder it is often confused with the seat of the "three wise men" or the city Seuva (Seuva), erected nea 
the Hill of Victory - Vaus or Victorialis - ordered three volhvov73. Here, again detected "polar" symbolism "Rotating Castle" that 
simulates the rotation of the heavens, as well as the symbolism of the place where the stone is kept light, or a stone, "causing the 
blind see the light", or stone, making nevidimym74. In particular, Prester John has a stone that can resurrect the Phoenix or the 
"Eagle." This indication is particularly important, as Eagle always, and especially in an era when these legends took shape, was a 
symbol of imperial functions, which in its "eternal" aspect is often linked to Rome to Phoenix. Some sources claim that the Iranian 
king Xerxes, Alexander of Macedon, the Roman emperors, and, finally, Oger, King of Denmark, and Guerrini "visited" the kingdom 
of "Prester John" 75. It is a mythological and vague recollections regarding contacts that the rulers of the great historical and 
legendary heroes were - more or less explicitly, through the invisible sanction, legitimize their royal dignity - with higher centers, 
where there is a stone, able to resurrect the Eagle. 



,0 

an 



According to one legend, Alexander the Great, when you come to India on a path that took him to Hercules and Dionysus, as the 
crowning success of his imperostroitelskih asked the Deity to grant him the highest mark of his victory. Following this request, he 
found the fountain of youth, as well as two trees - male and female - Tree of the Sun and the Moon Tree, who declared him to his 



fate and his empire, Imperium76. In the context of the legends of this cycle is often referred to as "Tree Centre", "Solar Tree" The 
Tree, which gives victory and empire, as well as the "Tree of Seth." 




Based on the mysterious and wonderful stories told by different travelers in the Middle Ages far and powerful empire, "the Great 
Khan," Emperor of the Tatars, to identify with the empire of the "King of Peace." It is often mixed with the kingdom as Prester John. 
Thus, in connection with the legend of the Great Khan appeared motives of the mysterious Tree of giving to those who approached 
him or hang him on a shield, and win universal empire. That's pretty typical text Johann von Gildesheyma: "Et in ipsa civitate in 
templi Tartarorum est arbora arida, de qua plurima narratur in universo mundo ... ab antiquo in omnibus partibus Orientis, fuit 
consuetudinis, et est, quod si quis rex vel dominus vel populus tarn potens efficitur, quod scutum vel cliptum suun potentur in illam 
arborem pendet, tunc illi regi vel domino in omnibus et per omnia obediunt et intendunt "(" And in this country in the temple of the 
Tatars have dry wood, which many describe the world ... and old, all over the East, according to custom, and if anyone wants to be 
king over the kingdom or nation, he should hang on the tree board, and the king will be subject to all and all to obey him ") 77. The 
tree, which is in question, it became a point of intersection of different values, often associated with verbal associations. Here we 
have in mind not only the symbolism of the "Dry Tree". "Dry Tree" - is only one interpretation of the expression "Arbre Solque", 
which can be understood as the "Solar Tree" - Arbor Solis, and as "Lonely Tree" - Arbre Seul, and as the "Tree of Seth" - Arbor 
Seth. Marco Polo, speaking of the country of the Great Khan, wrote: "et il ya un grandisme plain ou est I'Arbre Solque, que nous 
appelons I'Arbre Sec" ("There is a huge valley with" Arbre Solque ", which we call the" dry tree "). The word" "Solque" ", understood 
as the root of the Arabic, means" big, tall, long, "and in one English manuscript it is no longer on the Dry Tree and the Tree of Seth, 
as it has grown from a seed Seth is taken from the Tree of Knowledge, that is, from the tree, which grows in the center of the Earth 
Raya78. The fact that it gives the tree close to him and the power of universal power, also refers to the tradition associated with the 
"primordial state" (that is, with the Earth Paradise), and the separation of the two parts of the Tree, that is the Tree of the Sun and 
the Moon Tree or two aspects of the Tree of Knowledge and the Tree of Victory, indicates the synthesis of the two potentials, the 
prisoners in this heavenly state: synthesis, prior to the subsequent division of the "feminization" materialization of the spiritual and 
masculine. Communication with the central Empire Tree Tree of Paradise, are found in these legends, it is quite natural, given the 
obvious connection between the true manifestation of the "Empire" paradisiacal and primordial state. As for the definition of "dry", 
something about it we said : This feature indicates the period of imperial decline, which must be overcome. This meaning is clearly 
discerned, for example, in the legend, which says that the Tree "zazeleneet" at a meeting of Prester John and Frederick. 









As to the idea of "the kingdom of Prester John," that it has historically served as the basis for the concept of the need to integrate 
the scattered forces of the symbols of chivalry, the Empire and the Crusades. Based on more tangible version of this theory, the 
mysterious and mighty prince of the East - not a Christian, but a friend of Christians - to call for help in the Christian Crusades, in 
their most tragic periods in order to provide a holy war victorious ishod79. When these hopes were not fulfilled, and naively 
expected military aid was forthcoming, understanding the symbolic meaning of the figure of Prester John and his initiatic meaning 
"help" was also lost, and of all that survived only "legend", which became an integral part in a variety of traditions. 

You can also mention the series of stories about Ogere. In the Danish tradition of Oger and Holger - copy gibellinskogo emperor, 
escaped death, this remains a national hero in the cave of a mountain or in the underground labyrinths of the castle Kronburg and 
should reappear when his country and its people will face the greatest opasnost80. The plot of Ogere is most interesting for us in 
the development cycle of the legends of Charlemagne, because here he brings together different motifs, scattered in other places. 
Oger Danish appears here one of the paladins of the Emperor Charlemagne. After the conflict with the emperor, he gradually 
begins to acquire the features of the savior of Christianity in the most dangerous period for him, and also features a universal 
conqueror. He spreads his dominance on the entire East and reaches as Alexander the Great, the kingdom of Prester John with 
two trees growing there - lunar and solar, which are similar to the Universal Tree of Might of the legends of the Great Tree and 
Hane81 Center, associated with the primordial ("Paradise") the state. It is extremely interesting to note that the kingdom of Prester 
John "eventually identified with the very Avallone," that is centered traditsii82 Hyperborean, and moreover, there was a strict set a 
symbolic link between the "balm", derived from these two trees and a transition into a special form of Ogera of existence. He is now 
"live forever" and "one day return." In this respect, the German translation of stories about the travels of John Mandeville, made by 
Otto von Dimeringenom, we read: "Man saget auch in den selben Landen das Oggier by den selben boumen were und sich spyset 
mit dem balsam und do vo lebt er so lang, und meinen er lebe noch und solle har wider zu inen komen "(" They say that in these 
countries, Oger is at the very trees and feeds on their balm, and he lives a long time, and believes that it will live again and again 
and again once come back to us "). After his conquest of the East Danish Oger arrived on the island Avallon, where he became a 
lover of supernatural female fairy Morgana, sister of King Arthur. There he lives far away from the world, enjoying eternal youth. But 
the Christian world, being in great danger, again needs his help. Archangel Michael is sent to the fairy Morgana, and following the 
divine decree, Oger reappears in the world and won the victory. This reveals another very characteristic theme, coupled with the 
cycle of the Grail, and especially in connection with the "son of" King of the Grail, Lohengrin. - The hero, sent by the supreme 
sacred center in the world, "nedolzhen open either his name or place whence you came." The mission, which he performs and the 
force that acts through it, must remain secret and not to interfere with his personality, not to identify with her. Oger violates the law 
and provides a place where he "abides forever." At the same time instant falls on him, he quickly gets old and preparing to give up 
the ghost. But at the last moment comes and takes away the fairy Morgan again on the island of Avallon, where he will remain until 
the Christian world in the "seventh" no time to experience it nuzhdu83. 






In connection with these symbolic concepts is particularly important is the fact that Wolfram von Eschenbach Prester John appears 
a descendant of the dynasty of the Holy Grail, and the "Titurel" Parsifal himself assumes the function of "Prester John." It was in his 
kingdom, after all, was transferred Grail. So, he still points out who should become once again a secret "Presbyter John" 84. In the 
German version of the legend of Ogere, Prester John and the Great Khan appear Ogera two companions who founded two 
powerful dinastii85. Whatever it was, here we are talking about a single topic variations, expressed differently in different subjects 
related to the specific symbolic characters. 




Chapter 8. Dante - Veltro and Dux - "The Hound" and "leader" 





n order to complete a number of these comparisons, we note that the very concept of Dante's "Veltro" ("The Hound") and "Dux" 
("Leader") adjacent to the same chain of ideas and characters. 





From a purely external point of view, it is possible that Dante used the term "Veltro" - cane levriere ("Hound Dog") - on the phonetic 
similarities between the word "cane" ("dog") and the word "Khan" - the title of supreme ruler of the Mongol Empire. As we have 
said, at that time the Mongol Empire is often equated with the kingdom of Prester John, with the kingdom of Alexander, Ogera and 
so on, that is, with various images of the "Center of the World." Great Khan of the Tatars at that time had not yet become a 
synonym for terrible threat to Europe, but according to the descriptions of Marco Polo, Haytona, Mandeville, Johannes de Piano 
Carpini and so yes Further, understood as a powerful emperor of the mysterious, distant and vast empire, like a wise and happy 
monarch, a friend of the Christians, even though "heathen." Verbal assimilation, made of Khan Veltro, appears, however, already in 
the German version of Mandeville: "Heisset der grosse hundt, den man gewonlich nennt Can ... der Can ist der oberst und 
machtigst Keiser den die sunne uberscheinet". ("Great Dog, commonly referred to Khan, Khan ... Khan - ruler, and the mighty 
Emperor, eclipsing the sun"). Boccaccio, Dante's rejecting the interpretation Veltro as the Great Khan, the very fact of such denial 
confirmed the existence of this interpretatsii86. In addition, in the ancient German word "huno" (close to "hund", "dog") means lord, 
ruler, and this root is common in the names of ancient families of German aristocrats - for example, Huniger (Huniger) and so on. 










All this is not so absurd as it may seem at first glance, this identification ceases to look like something strange when we remember 
that at that time the title of the Great Khan embodied a sacred function, not associated with any particular individual and with any 
purely historical or geographical realm. Dante we are talking about this feature, and in the way it finds its Khan symbolic, but at the 
same time, the political incarnation associated with belief in the ideal of the Empire and with the hope of its restoration. All this is 
pretty close to the spirit of the cycle itself ozdateley the Holy Grail. 

It is impossible to analyze all levels of the symbolism of the "Divine Comedy". We confine ourselves to the most common indication 
that the journey of Dante through the different worlds can be understood as an artistic expression of the gradual scheme of spiritual 
purification and initiation. In addition, all the vicissitudes of travel directly related to the idea of empire. Dante lost in a dark and wild 
forest. His strength has touched, "never touched even a single person" 87. This is followed by hints of the "deserted beach" and 
"death with which he fought - over the stream, where the sea is not boiling," 88, and mention of the ascent of the "blessed hill" and 
the "anticipation of the heights of" 89. - All these details clearly remind us of similar situations that fall knights, hunters Grail, 
passing rapids encountered a deadly threat to the "wild lands" in order to eventually achieve "wild hill", Montsalvatsche, where is 
the "Castle of Joy" . 




In "Beatrice," again we are confronted with the theme of "weird women" - and it becomes even more impressive if we consider the 
whole symbolism of the "Fedeli d'Amore", initiatic organizations, to which belonged to Dante. And in love, driving Beatrice in her 
desire to constantly provide assistance with Dante's heaven, there is something resembling a destination and "Chosen", the 
"protection of the above," thanks to which the knights managed to approach the Grail and come out the winner of a chain of 
adventures and battles of the symbolic . And all the vicissitudes of the Knights of the Grail symbolically describe the same process 
of spiritual purification and initiation, and that in itself Dante. However, the "Divine Comedy" lacks the spirit of purely heroic tradition, 
as the line of Dante more connected with the tradition of theological and speculative. Therefore initiatory path of Dante described in 




the form of passing through hell and purgatory. 






In the first episode of "The Divine Comedy" Dante's approach to the hill block the lion and the wolf. These images are an exact 
match in the second part of the symbols poemy90 whore, "solid as a rock mountain high", and violent giant, enticing her. Most 
often, the she-wolf and prostitute is identified with the Catholic Church, and a lion and a giant house with the French monarchy, 
which is quite a plausible explanation. But if you go beyond a purely historical interpretation of the data of images (and to this 
historical allusions should include also the destruction of the Knights Templar), we find in all of this deeper and unconditional 
principles, not related to a specific historical situation. Lion and a giant in this case are images of the degraded, purely secular, 
covetous of the monarchy, by identifying with wild and degenerate purely military principle. The she-wolf and the harlot, in turn, - an 
expression of involution and degeneration of spiritual authority, priestly principle. However, it should be noted that the issue of the 



spiritual power of the concept of Dante suffer from the limitations imposed by his Christian faith. When he condemns the Church, he 
- as Luther later - reproaches her in decline in its transformation into a purely secular, secular organization, steeped in political 
intrigue rather than criticize it, starting from a higher, super-religious principle. Even if the church has remained pure and sinless, 
faithful to the original teachings of Christ, still, it would have been an obstacle for the full restoration of the integral tradition, as 
Christianity itself, in its very essence, is the moon, at best, ascetic-contemplative, Spirituality is not capable of becoming the basis 
for such a restoration. But we shall return to this in the present study, although this is as it should be clear to all who read our main 
product, "Revolt against the modern world." 




Whatever it was, Dante foretold the coming of that will end this double usurpation. Veltro, "The Hound" 91 , based on the 
equivalence of symbols encountered in the first and second part of the initiatory poem identically Dux, "Leader," "God's 
Messenger," which "will punish lust and his giant whore" 92. This is - a multi-faceted character avenger and restorer, the image of 
"Lord of the Universe", of whom Dante said in his essay "On the Monarchy." It has a direct bearing on the "restoration", which is 
based will be based on the destruction of both the principles of the decline (and perverted materialized masculinity and "feminized" 
passive spirituality). It also recalls the exploits of the Parasha-Rama. That such is the profound meaning of the symbol of the 
coming "leader", regardless of who were the historical figures, in which Dante, in accordance with their convictions gibellinskogo 
activist, wanted to see the realization of this mission. And to this must be added the presence of Dante's other characters found in 
the legends of the Great Khan, the Prester John, the Danish Ogere, about Alexander the Great, and in general in the imperial 
legends. - In the first place, it's Dry Tree, his idea of a new flowering, the image of the Eagle. 




Dante Tree symbol has two meanings: one - as the Tree of Knowledge and the "earthly paradise" (it is related to Adam), the other - 
as the Tree of the Empire (which is related to the Eagle). In general, the Empire Tree means in its relation to the primordial 
tradition. Dante tree - it is primarily Arbre Sec, Durre Baum (Dry Tree), an imperial legend. In the "Divine Comedy" and other works 
upomyanayutsya "a plant with leaves torn," "widowed branch," which states: "The man defile or polamaet (a plant) - the 
blasphemous act offends God - made him a saint for himself" 93 . Regarding the development of an imperial concept of Dante, 
leaving aside considerations associated with the historical conventions (symbols of different states of the church and its relations 
with the Empire), we emphasize only the following: Dante's vision of the Tree flourished immediately followed by the vision of open 
face "supernatural Virgin," and it is important that it compares itself with this person "living light shine forever" 94. In another vision 
again zazelenevshego Tree, accompanying prophecy of the coming of Dux, "Leader" (that is, a new manifestation of "Universal 
Lord"), is associated with the image of "primordial state", with the theme of "paradise on earth." This is stated in the following 
words: "In this forest, you will stay for long - and then you will be with me (that is, with the" supernatural virgin ") is infinite - in 
Rome, where Christ is Roman" 95. This means the effective involvement of the metaphysical kingdom, to Regnum, which 
obznachaetsya symbol of Rome, and the truth is that this formulation leads to suspect that such involvement is placed above the 
Christianity, and Christianity becomes a subordinate idea of the sacred Empire ("Christ - Roman" .) Further, after this vision, there 
is regeneration of the initiatic Dante through water storage, and the transformation opens the way for him to Heaven, then have 
access to purely metaphysical level of existence. The description of this development is also applicable symbolism of a new 
flowering "plants with torn leaves," of which we have already mentioned: "I will go out of the holy water - reborn as a new plant - like 
a fresh new branch - clean and ready to go to the stars" 96 . 




Dante spiritual path represented in the symbolism of the "Divine Comedy" ends the apotheosis of pure intuition, pure speculation: 
According to the dualistic idea of the Dante, according to which the Empire, with her usual active life (vita activa), with its inner 
spirituality, is the only preparatory stage for the contemplative life (vita contemplativa). Something similar can be seen in some 
forms of the Grail legend, especially in the most recent of these, as well as in Italian tales of Guerrini, ending departure of the hero 
in the ascetic life. But in the cycle of the Grail is a pessimistic outcome is described in terms of, and major versions of the Grail 
legends indicate a very different spirit, the incomparably higher voltage to reach for something higher and unconditional, rather than 
just pure intuition - and this should be seen influence of tradition, more original and more absolute than the one that inspired the 
genius of Dante. 

The fundamental principle underlying all justifications of war, 
from the point of view of human personality, is 'heroism'. 
War, it is said, offers man the opportunity to awaken the hero who 
sleeps within him. War breaks the routine of comfortable life; by 
means of its severe ordeals, it offers a transfiguring knowledge of 
life, life according to death. The moment the individual succeeds 
b living as a hero, even if it is the final moment of his earthly life, 
Weighs infinitely more on the scale of values than a protracted 
existence spent consuming monotonously among the trivialities 

• 1 1 cities. From a spiritual point of view, these possibilities make 
up for the negative and destructive tendencies of war, which are 

• me sidedly and tendentiously highlighted by pacifist materialism. 

i makes one realise the relativity of human life and therefore 

• I 11 the law of a 'more-than-life', and thus war has always an 
1 1 1 1 1 materialist value, a spiritual value. 

Such considerations have indisputable merit and cut off the 

i In lining of humanitarianism, sentimental grizzling, the pro- 

» of the champions of the 'immortal principles', and of the 

lull mutionaP of the heroes of the pen. Nevertheless, it must be 

• I imwledged that, in order to define fully the conditions under 

I mi 1 1 the spiritual aspect of war acrually becomes apparent, it 

n« ' < Hsary to examine the matter further, and to outline a sort 



' iil||lii illy published on 25 May 1935 as 'Sulle forme ddleroismo guerriero* in 
Mini ii iii.i ii tensile', // Regime Fascista. 

21 






METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



ol ^henftfTienniogy of warrior experience 5 , distinguishing vari- 
ous forms and arranging them hierarchically so as to highlight 
I he aspect which must be regarded as paramount for the heroic 
experience. 

To arrive at this result, it is necessary to recall a doctrine with 
which the regular readers of 'Diorama' will already be familiar, 
which - bear in mind - is not the product of some particular,' 
personal, philosophical construction, but rather that of actual 
data, positive and objective in nature It is the doctrine of the 
hierarchical quadripartition, which interprets most recent history 
as an involutionary fall from each of the four hierarchical degrees 
to the next. This quadripartition - it must be recalled - is what, 
in all traditional civilisations, gave rise to four different castes: the 
slaves, the bourgeois middle-class, the warrior aristocracy, and 
bearers of a pure, spiritual authority. Here, 'caste' does not mean 
- as most assume - something artificial and arbitrary, but rather 
the 'place' where individuals, sharing the same nature, the same 
type of interest and vocation, the same primordial qualification, 
gather. A specific 'truth', a specific function, defines the castes, in 
thek normal state, and not vice versa: this is not therefore a matter 
of privileges and ways of life being monopolised on die basis 
of a social constitution more or less artificially and unnaturally 
maintained. The underlying principle behind all the formative 
institutions in such societies, at least in their more authentic his- 
torical forms, is that there does not exist one simple, universal way 
of living one's life, but several distinct spiritual ways, appropriate 
respectively to the warrior, the bourgeois and the slave, and that, 
when the social functions and distributions actually correspond 
to this articulation, there is - according to die classic expression 
- an order secundum eqitum el bomrmr 

This order is 'hierarchical' in that it implies a natural depen- 
dence of the inferior ways of life on the superior ones - and, 
along with dependence, co-operation; the task of the superior is 
to attain expression and personhood on a purely spiritual basis. 
Only such cases, in which this straight and normal relationship 



THE FORMS OF WARLIKE HEROISM 



23 



of subordination and co-operation exists are healthy, as is made 
clear by the analogy of the human organism, which is unsound 
if, by some chance, the physical element (slaves) or die element 
of vegetative life (bourgeoisie) or that of the uncontrolled animal 
will (warriors) takes the primary and guiding place in the life of 
a man, and is sound only when spirit constitutes die central and 
ultimate point of reference for the remaining faculties - which, 
however, are not denied a partial autonomy, with lives and sub- 
ordinate rights of their own within the unity of the whole. 

Since we are not talking about just any old hierarchy, but about 
*l rue' hierarchy, which means that what is above and rules is really 
what is superior, it is necessary to refer to systems of civilisation 
In which, at the centre, there is a spiritual elite, and the ways of life 
ut die slaves, the bourgeois, and the warriors derive their ultimate 
meaning and supreme justification from reference to the principle 
v. hich is the specific heritage of this spiritual elite, and manifest 
i his principle in thek material activity. However, an abnormal state 
is arrived at if the centre shifts, so that the fundamental point of 
reference, instead of being die spiritual principle, is that of the 
??ervile caste, the bourgeoisie, or the warriors. Each of these castes 
manifests its own hierarchy and a certain code of co-operation, 
hut each is more unnatural, more distorted, and more subversive 
ihan the last, until the process reaches its limit - that is, a system 
hi which the vision of life characteristic of the slaves comes to 
ntricntate everything and to imbue itself with all the surviving 
\ l< ments of social wholeness. 

P« tlitically, this involutionary process is quite visible in Western 

hi lory, and it can be traced through into the most recent times. 

rimes of the aristocratic and sacred type have been succeeded by 

monarchical warrior States, to a large extent already secularised, 

Inch in turn have been replaced by states ruled by capitalist 

»li}Mivhies (bourgeois or merchant caste) and, finally, we have 

v (incsscd tendencies towards socialist, collecrivist and proletarian 

i He \\ which have culminated in Russian Bolshevism (the caste 

• I i he slaves). 



2 Latin: 'according to trulh and justice'. This has long been a common legal 



maxim. 






METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



' paralleled by transitions from one type of 

ii hi himiIm r fnjm one fundamental meaning of life 

flii i In < a< Ii phase, every concept, every principle, every 

IHnili pj i r iiinrs ,i different meaning, reflecting the world-view 

m( tin predominant caste. 

IIti i k1» » true of "war', and thus we can approach the task 
i i w iginally set ourselves, of specifying the varieties of meaning 
Which ha tile and heroic death can acquire. War has a different 
fete, in accordance with its being placed under the sign of one 
or another of the castes. While, in the cycle of the first caste, war 
was justified by spiritual motives, and showed clearly its value as 
a path to supernatural accomplishment and the attainment of 
immortality by the hero (this being the motive of the 'holy war*), 
in the cycle of the warrior aristocracies they fought for the honour 
and power of some particular prince, to whom they showed a 
loyalty which was willingly associated with the pleasure of war 
for war's sake. With the passage of power into the hands of the 
bourgeoisie, there was a deep transformation; at this point, the 
concept of the nation materialises and democratises itself, and 
an anti-aristocratic and naturalistic conception of the homeland 
is formed, so diat the warrior is replaced by the soldier-citizen, 
who fights simply for the defence or the conquest of land; wars, 
however, generally remain slyly driven by supremacist motives or 
tendencies originating within the economic and industrial order. 
Finally, the last stage, in which leadership passes into the hands 
of the slaves, has already been able to realise - in Bolshevism 
- another meaning of war, which finds expression in the follow- 
ing, characteristic words of Lenin: The war between nations is a 
childish game, preoccupied by the survival of a middle class which 
does not concern us. True war, our war, is the world revolution 
for the destruction of the bourgeoisie and the triumph of the 
proletariat' 

Given all this, it is obvious that the term 'hero' is a common 
denominator which embraces very different types and meanings. 
The readiness to die, to sacrifice one's own life, may be the sole 
prerequisite, from the technical and collectivist point of view, but 



THE FORMS OF WARLIKE HEROISM 



25 



also from the point of view of what today, rather brutally, has 
come to be referred to as 'cannon fodder'. However, it is also 
obvious that it is not from this point of view that war can claim 
any real spiritual value as regards the individual, once the latter 
does not appear as 'fodder' but as a personality - as is the Roman 
standpoint. This latter standpoint is only possible provided that 
there is a double relationship of means to ends - that is to say, 
when, on the one hand, the individual appears as a means with 
respect to a war and its material ends, but, simultaneously, when 
a war, in its turn, is a means for the individual, as an opportunity 
or path for the end of his spiritual accomplishment, favoured by 
heroic experience. There is then a synthesis, an energy and, with 
it, an utmost efficiency. 

If we proceed with this train of thought, it becomes rather 
clear from what has been said above that not all wars have the 
same possibilities. This is because of analogies, which are not 
merely abstractions, but which act positively along paths invisible 
to most people, between the collective character predominating 
in the various cycles of civilisation and the element which cor- 
responds to this character in the whole of die human entity. If, 
in the eras of die merchants and slaves, forces prevail which cor- 
respond to the energies which define man's pre-personal, physical, 
instinctive, 'telluric', organic-vital part, then, in the eras of the 
warriors and spiritual leaders, forces find expression which cor- 
respond, respectively, to what in man is character and volitional 
personality, and what in him is spiritualised personality, personal- 
ity realised according to its supernatural destiny. Because of all 
the transcendent factors it arouses in them, it is obvious that, in 
a war, the majority cannot but collectively undergo an awaken- 
ing, corresponding more or less to the predominant influence 
within the order of the causes which have been most decisive 
for the outbreak of that war. Individually, the heroic experience 
then leads to different points of arrival: more precisely, to three 
primary such points. 

These points correspond, basically, to three possible types 
of relation in which the warrior caste and its principle can find 






METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



THE FORMS OF WARLIKE HEROISM 



27 



11 '• ' « llfl aspect CO die other manifestations already con- 
id. i. •! In rho normal state, they are subordinate to the spiritual 
Con. iplt\ and then there breaks out a heroism which leads to 
m|>u life, to supra-pcrsonhood. The warrior principle may, 
Ik mvvcr, c< mstruct its own form, refusing to recognise anything 
as superior to it, and then the heroic experience takes on a qual- 
ity which is 'tragic': insolent, steel-tempered, but without light. 
Personality remains, and strengthens, but, at the same time, so 
does the limit constituted by its naturalistic and simply human 
nature. Nevertheless, this type of 'hero' shows a certain greatness, 
and, naturally, for the types hierarchically inferior to the warrior,' 
i.e., the bourgeois and the slave types, this war and this heroism 
already mean overcoming, elevation, accomplishment. The third 
case involves a degraded warrior principle, which has passed into 
the service of hierarchically inferior elements (the castes beneath 
it). In such cases, heroic experience is united, almost fatally, to an 
evocation, and an eruption, of instinctual, sub-personal, collec- 
tive, irrational forces, so that there occurs, basically, a lesion and 
a regression of the personality of the individual, who can only 
live life in a passive manner, driven cither by necessity or by the 
suggestive power of myths and passionate impulses. For example, 
the notorious stories of Remarque 3 reflect only possibilities of this 
latter kind; they recount the stories of human types who, driven 
to war by fake idealisms, at last realise that reality is something 
very different - they do not become base, nor deserters, but 
all that impels them forward throughout the most terrible tests 
are elemental forces, impulses, instincts, and reactions, in which 
there is not much human remaining, and which do not know any 
moment of light. 

In a preparation for war which must be not only material, but 
also spiritual, it is necessary to recognise all of this with a clear 
and unflinching gaze in order to be able to orientate souls and 



energies towards the higher solution, the only one which cor- 
responds to the ideals from which Fascism draws its inspiration. 
Fascism appears to us as a reconstructive revolution, in that 
it affirms an aristocratic and spiritual concept of the nation, as 
against both socialist and internationalist collectivism, and the 
democratic and demagogic notion of the nation. In addition, its 
scorn for the economic myth and its elevation of the nation in 
practice to the degree of 'warrior nation', marks positively the 
first degree of this reconstruction, which is to re- subordinate the 
values of the ancient castes of the 'merchants' and 'slaves' to the 
values of the immediately higher caste. The next step would be 
the spiritualisation of the warrior principle itself. The point of 
departure would then be present to develop a heroic experience 
in the sense of the highest of the three possibilities mentioned 
above. To understand how such a higher, spiritual possibility, 
which has been properly experienced in the greatest civilisations 
that have preceded us, and which, to speak the truth, is what 
makes apparent to us their constant and universal aspect, is more 
ihan just studious erudition. This is what we will deal with in 
our following writings, in which we shall focus essentially on the 
iraditions peculiar to ancient and Medieval Romanity. 



3 Erich Maria Remarque (1898- 1970) was a German writer who served in the First 
World War. His most well-known work is his 1927 novel. All Quiet on the Western 
Front, which depicted the war in horrific and pacifist terms. 



TheSacralityofWar 



In our previous article, we have seen that the phenomenon of 
? warrior heroism has different forms, and can have fundamentally 
different meanings, as seen from the point of view of a conception 
intended to establish the values of true spirituality. 

Resuming our argument from that point, we shall begin by 
indicating some conceptions related to our ancient traditions 
the Roman traditions. One generally has only a secular idea of 
the values of ancient Rome. According to this idea, the Roman 
was merely a soldier, in the most limited sense of the word, and 
it was by means of his merely soldierly qualities, together with a 
fortunate combination of circumstances, that he conquered the 
world. This is a false opinion. 

In the first place, right up until the end, the Romans considered 
it an article of faith that divine forces both created and protected 
the greatness of Rome - the impmmiP and the Aeternitas. 3 Those 
who want to limit themselves to a 'positive' point of view are 
obliged to replace this perception, deeply felt by the Romans, with 
a mystery; the mystery, that is, that a handful of men, without 
any really com pelling reasons, without even ideas of 'land' or 

1 Originally published on 8 June 1935 as 'Sacrita della guerra' in 'Diorama mensile; 

// Regime Fascista. 

2 Imperium which was the power vested in the leaders of Rome, was believed to 
originate from divine sanction. 

3 Aeternitas Imperii, meaning 'the eternity of Roman rule', was a goddess who 
looked after the preservation of the Empire. 

28 



THE SACRALITY OF WAR 



29 



'homeland', and without any of the myths or passions to which the 
moderns so willingly resort to justify war and promote heroism, 
kept moving, further and further, from one country to the next, 
following a strange and irresistible impulse, basing everything on 
an 'ascesis of power 5 . According to the unanimous testimony of 
all the Classical authors, the early Romans were highly religious - 
nostri maiores religiossimi mortaks, Sallust recalls 4 - and Cicero 5 and 
( .Jellius 6 repeat his view - but this religiosity of theirs was not 
confined to an abstract and isolated sphere, but pervaded their 
experience in its entirety, including in itself the world of action, 
and therefore also the world of the warrior experience. 

A special sacred college in Rome, the Feciales, presided over a 
quite definite system of rites which provided the mystical coun- 
terpart to every war, from its declaration to its termination. More 
generally, it is certain that one of the principles of the military 
art of the Romans required them not to allow themselves to 
be compelled to engage in battle before certain mystical signs 
had defined, so to speak, its 'moment'. Because of the mental 
distortions and prejudices resulting from modern education, 
most people of today would naturally be inclined to see in this 
an extrinsic, superstitious superstructure. The most benevolent 
may see in it an eccentric fatalism, but it is neither of these. The 
essence of the augural art practiced by the Roman patriciate, like 
similar disciplines, with more or less the same characters which 
Can easily be found in the cycle of the greater Indo-European 
civilisations, was not the discovery of 'fates' to be followed with 
superstitious passivity: rather, it was the knowledge of points of 
juncture with invisible influences, the use of which the forces of 



'Our ancestors were a most devout race of men', from Sallust's The Conspiracy of 
Catiline, chapter 12. In this passage Sallust praises the devotional character of the 
early Romans in opposition to the Romans of his day, whom he called ( the basest 
of mankind*. Sallust (86-34 BC) was a noted Roman historian. 

Marcus Tullius Cicero ( 1 06-43 BCE) was a philosopher and famed orator in the 
Roman Republic. 

Aulus Gellius (c. 125-c. 180 AD) was a Roman author whose only surviving work 
is his Attic Nights, which is a commonplace book of notes taken from various other 
sources that he had read or heard about. 



5P METAPHYSICS OF WAR 

men could be developed, multiplied, and led to act on a higher 
plane, in addition to the everyday one, thus - when the harmony 
was perfect - bringing about the removal of every obstacle and 
every resistance within an event-complex which was material 
and spiritual at the same time. In the light of this knowledge, it 
cannot be doubted that Roman values, the Roman 'ascesis of 
power', necessarily possessed a spiritual and sacred aspect, and 
that they were regarded not only as a means to military and tem- 
poral greatness, but also as a means of contact and connection 
with supernal forces. 

If it were appropriate to do so here, we could produce vari- 
ous materials in support of this diesis. We will limit ourselves, 
however, to mentioning that the ceremony of the triumph in 
Rome had a character which was far more religious than milita- 
ristic in a secular sense, and that many elements seem to show 
that the Roman attributed the victory of his leaders less to their 
simply human attributes than to a transcendent force manifesting 
itself in a real and efficient manner through them, their heroism 
and sometimes their sacrifice (as in the rite known as the devotio, 
in which the leaders sacrificed themselves). 7 The victor, in the 
aforesaid ceremony of the triumph, put on the insignia of the 
supreme God of the Capitol 8 as if he was a divine image, and went 
in procession to place the triumphal laurels of his victory in the 
hands of this God, as if to say that the latter was the true victor. 

Finally, one of the origins of the imperial apotheosis, that is 
to say, of the feeling that an immortal mwmP was concealed in 
the Emperor, is undoubtedly the experience of the warrior: the 

7 In the devotio> a Roman general would offer to sacrifice his own life in a battle in 
order to ensure victory. 

8 The Capitolium was a temple on one of the seven hills of Rome which was dedicat- 
ed to a triad of deities. The original triad consisted of Jupiter, Mars and Quinrus. 
Later it was comprised of Jupiter, Juno and Minerva, 

9 'The numen, unlike the notion of deus (as it later came to be understood), is not a 
being or a person, but a sheer power that is capable of producing efTects, of acting, 
and of manifesting itself. The sense of the real presence of such powers, or numina, 
as something simultaneously transcendent and yet immanent, marvelous yet fear- 
ful, constituted the substance of the original experience of the "sacred"' From Julius 
Evola, Revolt Against the Modern World (Rochester: Inner Traditions, 1995), p. 42. 



impcrator was originally the military leader, 10 acclaimed on the 
battlefield in the moment of victory: in this moment, he seemed 
transfigured by a force from above, fearful and wonderful, which 
imposed precisely the feeling of the mtmen. This view, we may 
add, is not peculiar to Rome, but is found throughout die whole 
ol (Classical Mediterranean antiquity, and it was not restricted 
to victors in war, but sometimes applied also to the winners of 
(he Olympic Games and of the bloody fights of the circus. In the 
I lellades, 11 the myth of heroes merges with mystical doctrines, 
such as Orphism, 12 which significandy unite the character of the 
victorious warrior and the initiate, victor over death, in the same 
symbolism. 

These are precise indications of a heroism and a system of 
\ alues which develop into various more or less self-consciously 
spiritual paths, paths sanctified not only by the glorious material 
conquest which they mediate, but also by the fact that they repre- 
sent a sort of ritual evocation involving conquest of the intangible. 

Let us consider some other evidence of this tradition, which, 
by its very nature, is metaphysical: elements such as 'race' cannot 
therefore possess more than a secondary, contingent place in it. 
We say this because, in our next article, we intend to deal with 
the 'holy war' practiced by the warriors of the 'Holy Roman 
Umpire'. 13 That civilisation, as is well known, represents a point 
of creative convergence between various components: Roman, 
( hristian, and Nordic. 



10 This was the case in the Roman Republic. During the Roman Empire, the title 
of imperator was only granted to the Emperor, and occasionally members of his 
family. 

1 1 The plural form of Hellas, which is the ancient name of Greece. 

12 Orphism was a religion in ancient Greece which differed in a number of respects 
from the popular religion, said to have been founded by the poet Orpheus who 
descended to Hades and then retu rned. 

13 The Holy Roman Empire, as it came to be known, was founded in 962 AD and 
survived in various forms until 1K06. Its territorial makeup was always in flux, but 
at its peak it consisted of Central Europe, including modern-day Germany, as well 
as parts of present-day Italy and France. In spite of its name, Rome was rarely ever 
part of the Empire, and there was no direct connection between it and the original 
Roman Empire, 



\f 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 




.ili. m« I \ discussed the relevant features of the first of 
Hn i . rimprmcnts (i.e., the Roman). The Christian component 
ill ippcar with tlie features of a knightly, supranational heroism 
M the Crusade. The Nordic component remains to be indicated. 
Jo avoid alarming our readers unnecessarily we have stated at the 
outset that what we refer to has, essentially, a supra-racial char- 
acter, and is not therefore calculated to encourage the stance of 
any self-styled 'special' people towards others. To limit ourselves 
to one hint at what sort of thing we here mean to exclude, we 
will say that, surprising as it may seem, in the more or less frantic 
Nordic revivalism celebrated today ad mum delphitr? 4 by National 
Socialist Germany, we find mainly a deformation and vulgarisa- 
tion of Nordic traditions as they existed originally, and as they 
could still be found in those princes who considered it a great 
honour to be able to say of themselves that they were Romans, 
although of the Teutonic race Instead, for many racist writers 
today, 'Nordic' has come to mean anti-Roman, and 'Roman' has 
come to mean, more or less, 'Jewish'. 

Having said that, we think it is appropriate to reproduce this 
significant formula of exhortation to the warrior as found in the 
ancient Celtic tradition: Tight for your land, and accept death 
if need be, since death is a victory and a liberation to the soul/ 
The expression mors triumphal in our own Classical tradition 
corresponds to this concept. As for the properly Nordic tradition, 
well-known to all is the part which concerns Valhalla, the seat of 
celestial immortality, reserved for the 'free' divine stock and the 
heroes fallen on the battlefield ('Valhalla' means literally 'from 
the palace of the chosen 7 ). The Lord of this symbolic seat, Odin 
or Wotan, appears in the Yngtingasaga as the one who, by his sym- 
bolic self-sacrifice on the 'world tree', showed the heroes how to 
reach the divine sojourn, where they live eternally as on a bright 
peak, which remains in perpetual sunlight, above every cloud. 



14 Por the use of the Dauphin; after a practice of censoring the Greek and Roman 
classics which was promoted by Louis XIV for the education of his son, which called 
for the removal of supposedly offensive passages from them. 

15 Latin: 'triumphal death*. 



THE SACRALITY OF WAR 



33 



According to this tradition, no sacrifice or form of worship was 
more appreciated by the supreme God, and rich in supra-mundane 
fruits, than that which is performed by the warrior who fights 
and falls on the battlefield. But this is not all. The spirits of the 
fallen heroes would add their forces to the phalanx of those who 
assist the 'celestial heroes' in fighting in the ragnarokk, that is to 
say, the fate of the 'darkening of the divine', which, according to 
these teachings, and also according to the Hellenes (Hcsiod), 16 
has threatened the world since time immemorial. 

We will see this motif reappear, in a different form, in the 
Medieval legends which relate to the 'last battle 7 , which the immor- 
tal emperor will fight Here, to illustrate the universality of these 
elements, we will point out the similarity between these ancient 
Nordic conceptions (which, let us say in passing, Wagner 17 has 
rendered unrecognisable by means of his hazy, bombastic, char- 
acteristically Teutonic romanticism) and the ancient Iranian, and 
later Persian, conceptions. Many may be astonished to hear that 
the well-known Valkyries, which choose the souls of the warriors 
destined for Valhalla, are only the transcendental personification 
of parts of the warriors themselves, parts which find their exact 
equivalent in the Fravashi, of which the Iranian-Persian tradi- 
tions speak - the Fravashi, also represented as women of light 
and stormy virgins of batde, which personify more or less the 
supernatural forces by means of which the human natures of the 
warriors 'faithful to die God of Light' can transfigure themselves 
and bring about terrible, overwhelming and bloody victories. The 
Iranian tradition also includes the symbolic conception of a divine 
figure -Mithra, described as 'the warrior who never sleeps' - who, 
at the head of his faithful Fravashi, fights against the emissaries 



1 6 Hesiod (approx. 7th century BC) was an early Greek poet. His most famous work, 
the Works and Days, outlines the cyclical Five Ages of Man, beginning with the 
Utopian Golden Age and ending in the apocalyptic Iron Age. 

17 Richard Wagner (1813*1883), the German composer, whose works were very 
influential in all spheres of European culture at this time. Evola no doubt has in 
mind Wagner's tetralogy of music dramas. The Ring of the Nibelungen, the libretto 
of which is based on the ancient Norse myths. 




34 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



of the dark god until die coming of the Saoshyant, Lord of the 
future kingdom of 'triumphant* peace. 

These elements of ancient Indo-European tradition, in which 
the motifs recur of the sacrality of war and of the hero who 
does not really die but becomes part of a mystical army in a 
cosmic battle, have had a perceptible effect on certain elements 
of Christianity - at least that Christianity which could realisti- 
cally adopt the motto: vita est militia super terram* and recognise 
not only salvation dirough humility, charity, hope and the rest, 
but also that - by including the heroic element, in out case - 'the 
Kingdom of Heaven can be taken by storm'. It is precisely this 
convergence of motifs which gave birth to the spiritual concep- 
tion of 'Greater War' peculiar to the medieval age, which we shalJ 
discuss in our next article in 'Diorama', where we shall deal more 
closely with die interior, individual, but nevertheless topical aspect 
of these teachings. 



18 Latin: 'life is a struggle on Earth'. 



The Meaning of the Crusades 1 



Lei us resume our examination of those traditions concerning 
heroism in which war is regarded as a path of spiritual 
u silisation in the strictest sense of the term, and thus acquires a 
1 1 nnsccndcnt justification and purpose. We have already discussed 
the conceptions of the ancient Roman world in this respect. We 

I hen described the Nordic traditions regarding the immortalising 
character of the truly heroic death on the battlefield, It was 
necessary to examine these traditions before considering the 
medieval world, since, as is generally recognised, the Middle Ages, 

I I a culture, arose from the synthesis of three elements; firstly, 
U< rrnan; secondly, Nordic; and thirdly, Christian. 

'Thus, we are now in a position to examine the idea of the 
n redness of War 5 as the Western Medieval age knew and cul- 
tivated it. As should be evident, we here refer to the Crusades 
;is understood in their deepest sense, not the sense claimed by 
historical materialists, according to which they are mere effects 
of economical and ethnic determinisms, nor the sense claimed by 
'developed* minds, according to which they are mere phenomena 
of superstition and religious exaltation - nor, finally, will we even 
i tgard them as simply Christian phenomena. In respect to this last 
point it is necessary not to lose sight of the correct relationship 
berwecn means and ends. It is often said that, in the Crusades, the 



Originally published on 9 July 1935 as 'Significato della Crociata* in 'Diorama 
niensile', II Regime Fascista. 

35 



36 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



I ltl Ml> AN INti OF THE CRUSADES 



37 



Christian faith made use of the heroic spirit of Western chivalry. 
However, the opposite is the truth: that is to say, the Christian 
faith, and the relative and contingent imperatives of the religious 
struggle against the 'infidel' and the liberation' of the Temple' 
and 'Holy Land', were merely the means which allowed the heroic 
spirit to manifest itself, to affirm itself, and to realise a sort of 
ascesis, distinct from that of the contemplative, but no less rich 
in spiritual fruits. Most of the knights who gave their energies 
and their blood for the 'holy war' had only the vaguest ideas and 
the sketchiest theological knowledge regarding the doctrine for 
which they fought. 

However, the cultural context of the Crusades contained a 
wealth of elements able to confer upon them a higher, spiritu- 
ally symbolic meaning. Transcendent myths resurfaced from the 
subconscious in the soul of Western chivalry: the conquest of 
the 'Holy Land' located 'beyond the sea' was much more closely 
associated than many people have imagined with the ancient saga 
according to which 'in the distant East, where die Sun rises, lies the 
sacred city where death does not exist, and die fortunate heroes 
who are able to reach it enjoy celestial serenity and perpetual life'. 

Moreover, the struggle against Islam had, by its nature and 
from its inception, the significance of an ascetic test This was 
not merely a struggle for the kingdoms of die earth', wrote the 
famous historian of die Crusades, Kugler, 2 'but a struggle for the 
Kingdom of Heaven: the Crusades were not a thing of men, but 
rather of God - therefore, diey should not be thought of in the 
same way as other human events.' 

Sacred war, according to an old chronicler, should be com- 
pared to 'a bath like that in the fire of purgatory, but before death'. 
Those who died in the Crusades were compared symbolically by 
Popes and priests to 'gold tested three times and refined seven 
times in the fire', a purifying ordeal so powerful that it opened 
the way to die supreme Lord. 



2 Bernhard Kugler, Geschichte der Kreuzziige (Berlin: G. Grote, 1880). No English 
translation exists. 



ever forget this oracle \ wrote Saint Bernard, 3 'whether we 

I | i i >i w hct her we die, we belong to the Lord. It is a glory for you 

in vui lo leave the batde [unless] covered with laurels. But it is an 

ii greater glory to earn on the batdefield an immortal crown 

| | ( )h fortunate condition, in which death can be approached 

H h* nit (car, waited for with impatience, and received with a 

i i n< heart!' It was promised that the Crusader would attain an 

ilmululc glory — glorie asolne, in the Provencal tongue — and that 

In • c m tkl find 'rest in paradise' — conquerre lit en paradis — that is to 

i\, he would achieve the supra-life, the supernatural state of exis- 
i< ni e, s< imething beyond religious representation. In this respect, 
\\ i ii ;il* m, the coveted goal of the conquest, appeared in a double 
AUpcct, as an earthly city and as a symbolic, celestial and intangible 
\ hy and the Crusade gained an inner value independent of all 
t»iitrr integuments, supports and apparent motives. 

Besides, the greatest contribution in manpower was supplied 
h i the ( rusades by knighdy orders such as the Templars and the 
I nights of Saint John, which were made up of men who, like the 
monk or the Christian ascetic, had learned to despise the vanity 
nil his life; warriors weary of the world, who had seen everything 
•iiul enjoyed everything, withdrew into such orders, thus making 
themselves ready for an absolute action, free from the interests 
< if u >mmon, temporal life, and also of political life in the narrow 
rnst. Urban VIII 4 addressed chivalry as the supra-national com- 
munity of those who were 'ready to run to war wherever it might 
break out, and to bring to it the fear of their arms in defence of 
honour and of justice*. They should answer die call to 'sacred 
war' a]J the more readily, according to one of the writers of the 
dnic, since its reward is not an earthly fief, always revocable and 
i Din ingent, but a 'celestial fief. 



J Saint Bernard of Clairvaux (1090-1 153), a French abbot who was extremely influ- 
ential in raising the Second Crusade, He also helped to formulate the Rule of the 
Knights Templar 

I Urban VIII (1568-1644) was Pope from 1623 until his death, during the Thirty 
Years' War. He was the last Pope to use armed force in an effort to increase the 
area under Papal authority. He was also the Pope who condemned Galileo for his 
theory of heliocentrism. 



38 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



Moreover, the course of the Crusades, with all its broader 
implications for the general ideology of the time, led to a purifi- 
cation and internalisation of the spirit of the enterprise. Given 
the initial conviction that the war for the 'true faith' could not but 
have a victorious result, the first military setbacks undergone by 
the Crusader armies were a source of surprise and dismay; but, in 
the end, they served to bring to light the higher aspect of 'sacred 
war\ The unhappy fate of a Crusade was compared by the cler- 
ics of Rome to the misfortunes of virtue, which are made good 
only in another life. But, by taking this approach, they were already 
close to recognising something superior to both victory and 
defeat, and to according the highest importance to the distinctive 
aspect of heroic action which is accomplished independendy of 
any visible and material fruits, almost in the sense of an offering, 
which draws, from the virile sacrifice of all human elements, the 
immortalising 'absolute glory'. 

One sees that in this way they approached a plane that was 
supra-traditional, in the most strict, historical and religious sense 
of the word 'tradition'. The particular religious faith, the immedi- 
ate purposes, the antagonistic spirit, were revealed clearly as mere 
means, as inessential in themselves, as the precise nature of a 
fuel which is used for the sole purpose of reviving and feeding a 
flame. What remained at the centre, however, was the sacred value 
of war. Thus it became possible to recognise diat the opponents 
of the moment accorded to battle die same traditional meaning. 

In this way and despite everything, the Crusades were able to 
enrich the cultural exchange between the Ghibelline 5 West and 
the Arabic East (itseJf the centre of more ancient traditional ele- 
ments), an exchange whose significance is much greater than most 
historians have yet recognised. As the knights of the crusading 
orders found themselves in the presence of knights of Arab orders 



5 The Ghibcllines were a faclion in the Holy Roman Empire who favoured the im- 
perial power of the Hohenstaufen throne over the power of the Vatican, as was 
supported by their rivals, the Guelphs. Evola saw this conflict as highlighting the 
distinction between priestly and royal authority in the state, since he believed the 
Ghibelline view to be the only valid one from a traditional perspective. He dis- 
cusses this at length in Revolt Against the Modern World. 



111! II AN INC; OF THE CRUSADES 



39 



•In. h wcvv almost their doubles, manifesting correspondences 
in • dues, customs, and sometimes even symbols, so die 'sacred 
(i * which had impelled the two civilisations against each other in 
ih« name of their respective religions, led them at the same time 
h i in< t?t, that is to say, to realise that, despite having as starting 
points I wo different faiths, they had eventually accorded io war 
iltt identical, independent value of spirituality. 

In our next article, we shall study the way in which, from die 
l»M mists of his faith, the ancient Arab Knight ascended to the 
1 1 nc supra- traditional point which the Crusader Knighr attained 
li his heroic asceticism. 

I h >r now, however, we would like to deal with a different point. 
II i< >se who regard the Crusades, with indignation, as among the 
iiinsi extravagant episodes of the 'dark' Middle Ages, have not 
fiven the slightest suspicion that what they call 'religious fanati- 
• i in 1 was the visible sign of the presence and effectiveness of a 
imnitivity and decisiveness, the absence of which is more charac- 
i«i islic of true barbarism. In fact, the man of the Crusades was able to 
u\t\ to fight and to die for a purpose which, in its essence, was supra-political 
titnl utpra-human^ and to serve on a front defined no longer by what 
i particularistic, but rather by what is universal. This remains a 
\ ;ihu\ an unshakeable point of reference. 

Naturally, this must not be misunderstood to mean that the 
transcendent motive may be used as an excuse for the warrior to 
I iccomc indifferent, to forget the duties inherent in his belonging 
lo a race and to a fatherland. This is not at aU our point, which 
c < > 1 1 1_ erns rather the essentially deeply disparate meanings accord- 
ing re j which actions and sacrifices can be experienced, despite the 
foci that, from the external point of view, they may be absolutely 
I he same. There is a radical difference between the one who 
engages in warfare simply as such, and the one who simultane- 
ously engages in 'sacred war' and finds in it a higher experience, 
I m >rh desired and desirable for the spirit. 

We must add that, although this difference is primarily an 
interior one, nevertheless, because die powers of interiority are 



40 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



able co find expression also in exteriority, effects derive from it 
also on the exterior plane, specifically in the following respects: 
First of all, in an 'indomitability' of the heroic impulse: the 
one who experiences heroism spiritually is pervaded with a meta- 
physical tension, an impetus, whose object is Infinite', and which, 
therefore, will carry him perpetually forward, beyond the capacity 
of one who fights from necessity, fights as a trade, or is spurred 
by natural instincts or external suggestion. 

Secondly, the one who fights according to the sense of 'sacred 
war' is spontaneously beyond every particularism and exists in a 
spiritual climate which, at any given moment, may very well give 
rise and life to a supra-national unity of action. This is precisely 
what occurred in the Crusades when princes and dukes of every 
land gathered in the heroic and sacred enterprise, regardless of 
their particular utilitarian interests or political divisions, bringing 
about for the first time a great European unity, true to the common 
civilisation and to the very principle of the Holy Roman Empire. 
Now, in this respect as well, if we are able to leave aside the 
'integument', if we are able to isolate the essential from the contin- 
gent, we wiU find an element whose precious value is not restricted 
to any particular historical period. To succeed in referring heroic 
action also to an 'ascetic' plane, and in justifying the former 
according to the latter, is to clear the road towards a possible new 
unity of civilisation, to remove every antagonism conditioned by 
matter, to prepare the environment for great distances and for 
great fronts, and, therefore, to adapt the outer purposes of action 
gradually to its new spiritual meaning, when it is no longer a land 
and the temporal ambitions of a land for which one fights, but a 
superior principle of civilisation, a foreshadowing of what, even 
though itself metaphysical, moves ever forward, beyond every 
limit, beyond every danger, beyond every destruction. 



I he Greater War and the Lesser War 



Our readers should not consider it strange that, after having 
examined a group of Western traditions relating to holy war 
1 1 l.i l ts to say, to war as a spiritual value — we now propose to 
« it nine this same concept as expressed in the Islamic tradition. 
In (;ui, for our purposes (as we have often pointed out) it is 
inu it'siing to clarify the objective value of a principle by means 
i i\w demonstration of its universality, that is to say, of its 
i - H i Inrmity to the principle of quod ztbiqt/e, quod ah omnibus, et quod 
ttmjwr ( )nly m this way can we establish with certainty that some 
Values are absolutely independent of die views of any particular 
1 1 unker, and also that, in their essence, they are superior to the 
I' irticular forms which they have assumed in order to manifest 
i hem selves in one or another historical tradition. The more we 
mmiagc to demonstrate the inner correspondence of such forms 
,ii ul t heir unique principle, the more deeply the reader will become 
lible to delve into his own tradition, to possess it fully, and to 
understand it from its own unique metaphysical point of origin. 
I listorically, in order to comprehend what concerns us here, 
ii must first be understood that the Islamic tradition, rather than 
Having such a unique metaphysical point of origin, is essentially 



< )riginaliy published on 21 July 1935 as 'La grande e la piccola guerre' in 'Diorajna 
it tensile', // Regime Fascista. 

Latin: 'that which is accepted everywhere, by everyone, and always'. This is an axiom 
of the ( Catholic Church. 

41 



42 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



I Mi i.KhATER WAR AND THE LESSER WAR 



43 



dependent upon its inheritance of the Persian tradition - Persia, as 
is well known, having possessed one of the highest pre-European 
civilisations. The original Mazdaist conception of religion, as mili- 
tary service under the sign of the 'God of Light', and of existence 
as a continuous, relendess struggle to rescue beings and things 
from the control of an anti-god, is at the centre of the Persian 
vision of life, and should be considered as the metaphysical coun- 
terpart and spiritual background to the warrior enterprises which 
culminated in the creadon of the empire of the 'kings of kings' 
by the Persians. After the fall of Persia's power, echoes of such 
traditions persisted in the cycle of Medieval Arabian civilisation 
in forms which became slightly more materialistic and sometimes 
exaggerated, yet not to such an extent that their original elements 
of spirituality were entirely lost. 

We bring up traditions of that kind here, above all because they 
introduce a concept which is very useful in further clarifying the 
order of ideas set out in our latest articles; namely, die concept 
of the 'greater' or 'holy war', as distinct from the 'lesser war', 
but at the same time as related to the latter in a special manner. 
The distinction itself derives from a saying of the Prophet, who, 
returning from a battle, declared, 'I return now from the lesser 
to the greater war.' 3 

The lesser war here corresponds to the exoteric war, the 
bloody battle which is fought with material arms against the 
enemy, against the 'barbarian', against an inferior race over whom 
a superior right is claimed, or, finally, when the event is motivated 
by a religious justification, against the 'infidel'. No matter how 
terrible and tragic the events, no matter how huge the destruction, 
this war, metaphysically, still remains a lesser war \ The 'greater' or 
'holy war' is, contrarily, of the interior and intangible order - it 
is the war which is fought against the enemy, the 'barbarian', the 
'infidel', whom everyone bears in himself, or whom everyone can 
see arising in himself on every occasion that he tries to subject 

3 This is recorded in the Hadith (oral traditions) of the Prophet Muhammad - specifi- 
cally, in the Tarikh Baghdad of Khatib al-Baghdadi (13:493, 523), The text goes on 
to say that Muhammad's followers asked him, 'What is the greater war?; to which 
he replied, "The war against the lower part of our nature,' 



la \ hole being to a spiritual law. Appearing in the forms of 
? m mg, partiality, passion, instinctuality, weakness and inward 
1 1 \ lice, the enemy within the natural man must be vanquished,, 
<i i ( i stance broken, chained and subjected to the spiritual man, 
i In I King the condition of reaching inner liberation, the 'trium- 
jtlniM peace' which allows one to participate in what is beyond 
Imih life and death. 

Some may say that this is simply asceticism. The greater, holy 
i Ms i he ascesis which has always been a philosophical goal. It 
\ i mid Ik* tempting to add as well: it is the path of those who wish 
ft 3 vdcape from the world and who, using the excuse of inner 
hln ration, become a herd of pacifist cowards. This is not at ail 
1 1 1< \i ay rhings are. After the distinction between the two types of 
•a mi I here is their synthesis. It is a feature of heroic traditions that 
ihrv prescribe the 'lesser war', that is to say the real, bloody war, 
i .in instrument in the realisation of the 'greater* or 'holy war'; 
vi much so that, finally, both become one and the same thing. 

Thus, in Islam, 'holy war' —jihad- and 'the path of God' are 
luUTchangeable terms. The one who fights is on the 'path of 
G«kJ\ \ well-known and quite characteristic saying of this tradi- 
tion is, 'The blood of heroes is closer to the Lord dian the ink 
fil scholars and the prayers of the pious.' 4 

i Mice again, as in the traditions already reviewed by us, as in the 
K< in van ascesis of power and in the classical mors triumphalis y action 
nl fains the value of an inner overcoming and of an approximation 
U> a life no longer mixed with darkness, contingency, uncertainty 
and death. In more concrete terms, the predicaments, risks and 
ordeals peculiar to the events of war bring about an emergence 
i >l the inner 'enemy', which, in the forms of the instinct of self- 
preservation, cowardice, cruelty, pin and blind riotousness, arise 
RE obstacles to be vanquished just as one fights the outer enemy. 
1 1 is clear from this that the decisive point is constituted by one's 
inner orientation, one's unshakeable persistence in what is spiritual 



4 I am uncertain of the origin of this saying, but it is contradicted by another Hadith 
taken from the Al-JQam? al-Sagh'tr of Imam al-Suyuti: 'The ink of the scholar is 
holier than the blood of the martyr.' 



44 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



I Mi UU .VTFRWARAND THE LESSER WAR 



45 



in this double struggle, so that an irresistible and blind changing 
of oneself into a sort of wild animal does not occur, but, instead, 
a way is found of not letting the deepest forces escape, a way 
of seeing to it that one is never overwhelmed inwardly, that one 
always remains supreme master of oneself, and, precisely because 
of this sovereignty, one remains able to affirm himself against 
every possible limitation. In a tradition to which we will dedicate 
our next article, this situation is represented by a most character- 
istic symbol: the warrior is accompanied by an impassive divine 
being who, without fighting, leads and guides him in his struggle, 
side by side with him in the same war chariot. This symbol is die 
personified expression of a duality of principles, which the true 
hero, from whom something sacred always emanates, maintains 
unceasingly within himself. 

To return to the Islamic tradition, we can read in its principal 
text, 'So let those who sell the life of this world for the Next 
World fight in the Way of Allah. If someone fights in the Way 
of Allah, whether he is killed or is victorious. We will pay him an 
immense reward' 5 (4:74). 

The metaphysical premises for this are prescribed as follows: 
Tight in the Way of Allah against those who fight you' (2:190); 
'Kill them wherever you come across them' (II, 191); 'Do not 
become faint-hearted and call for peace' (47:35); 'The life of this 
world is merely a game and a diversion' (47:36); "But whoever is 
tight-fisted is only tight-fisted to himself * (47:38). 

This last principle is obviously a parallel to die evangelical text: 
"Whoever seeks to save his life wiU lose it, and whoever loses his 
life will preserve it', 6 as is confirmed by these further passages: 
'You who have imanV what is the matter with you that when you 
are told, "Go out and fight in the way of Allah", you sink down 
heavily to the earth? Are you happier with this world than the 

5 The Noble Quran; A New Rendering of Its Meaning in English (Norwich: Bookwork, 
2005), interpreted by Aisha Bewley. All quotes from the Qur'an are taken from this 
edition, 

6 Luke 17:33, as rendered in Holy Bible: Vm New King James (Nashville: T. Nelson, 
1982). 

7 Arabic: 'belief! 






. t World?" (9:38); "Say [to the Companions]: "What do you 
i hi fnt us except for one of the two best things [martyrdom 
Hi i mmiv]?" (9:52). 

1 1 icae excerpts too are worth noting: 'Fighting is prescribed for 

iau t-xen if it is hateful to you. It may be that you hate something 

In it u is good for you and it may be that you love something 

( 1 4 1 » 1 1 is bad for you. Allah knows and you do not know* (2:21 6), 

in hi jil so, "When a sure? is sent down saying: "Have iman in Allah 

hi id di j jihad together with His Messenger", those among diem 

• lib wraith will ask you to excuse them, saying, "Let us remain 
Mih those who stay behind." They are pleased to be with those 
' ho M) behind. Their hearts have been stamped so they do not 

Irntfand. But the Messenger and those who have iman along 

i<b I uin have done jihad with their wealth and with themselves. 

I hey me the people who will have the good things. They are the 
? mm v ho are successful' (9:86-89). 

Therefore we have here a sort oiamorfati? a mysterious way 
« ♦! intuiting, evoking and heroically resolving one's own destiny 
m {Ik* intimate certainty that, when the 'right intention' is present, 

i hen all indolence and cowardice are vanquished, and the leap 
beyond the lives of oneself and others, beyond happiness and 
mi I or tunc, is driven by a sense of spiritual destiny and a thirst 
I'm the absolute existence, then one has given birth to a force 

• hh h will not be able to miss the supreme goal. Then the crisis 
bI I ragic and heroic death becomes an insignificant contingency 
which can be expressed, in religious terms, in the following words: 
1 \ lor those who fight in the Way of Allah, He will not let their 
m lions go astray. He will guide them and better their condition 
unci He will admit them into the Garden which He has made 
known to them 3 (47:4-6). 

\s if by a circular path the reader is thus brought back to the 
Mme ideas which were examined in our previous writings on the 
subject of tradition, whether classical or Nordic- Medieval: that is 
lo say, to die idea of a privileged immortality reserved for heroes, 



K A sura is a chapter of the Quran. 
x i Latin: love of fate'. 



46 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



who alone, according to Hcsiod, pass on to inhabit symbolic 
islands, which image forth the bright and intangible existence of 
the Olympians. 10 

Additionally, in the Islamic tradition, there are frequent refer- 
ences to the idea that some warriors fallen in the 'sacred war' are 
in reality not dead" in a sense which is not symbolic in any way, 
and which need not be referred to supernatural states cut off 
from the energies and destinies of the living. It is not possible to 
enter into this domain, which is rather mysterious and requires 
the support of references which would ill befit the present article. 
What we can say definitely is that, even today, and particularly in 
Italy, the rites by which a warrior community declares its most 
heroically fallen companions still 'present' have regained a special 
evocative force. He who begins from the belief that everything 
which, by a process of involution, retains today only an allegorical 
and, at best, moral character, whereas it originally possessed the 
value of reality, and every rite contained real action and not mere 
'ceremony' - for him these warrior rites of today could perhaps 
provide material for meditation, and he could perhaps approach 
the mystery contained in the teaching already quoted: that is, the 
idea of heroes who really never died, and the idea of victors who, 
like the Roman Caesar, remain as 'perpetual victors' at the centre 
of a human stock. 



10 The gods of the Greek pantheon. 

1 1 For example, Quran 1:154: € Do not say that those who are killed in the Way of 
Allah are dead. On the contrary, they are alive but you are not aware of it * 



The Metaphysics of War 1 



We will conclude our series of essays for the Diorama' on 
the subject of war as a spiritual value by discussing another 
tradition within the Indo-European heroic cycle, that of the 
Wwqtwad-Gita, which is a very well-known text of ancient Hindu 
\\ isdom compiled essentially for the warrior caste. 

YVc have not chosen this text arbitrarily and we would not 
wish anyone to imagine that we offer a newspaper like the Regime 
,u talcs on exotic subjects as objects of curiosity. Now that our 
dm ussion of the Islamic tradition has allowed us to express, in 
flmcral terms, the idea that the internal or 'greater war' is the 
.it tamable counterpart and soul of the external war, so a discussion 
nil he tradition contained in the aforementioned text will allow us 
tu present a clear and concise metaphysical vision of the matter. 

* >n a more exterior plane, such a discussion of the Hindu 
K.ist (which is the great, heroic Hast, not that of Theosophists, 
humanitarian pantheists or old gentlemen in rapture before the 
< ,i i ious C Jandhis and Rabindranath Tagores 2 ) will assist also in the 



Originally published on 13 August 1935 as 'Metafisica della guerra' in 'Diorama 
inensile 1 , 11 Regime Fascista. 

Kabindranath Tagore (1861-1941) was a highly influential Bengali artist and phi- 
losopher who won the 1913 Nobel Prize in Literature, which brought him great 
international fame at the time Evola was writing. Although Tagore drew upon his 
native Hindu tradition in his works, he emphasized the individual over tradition, 
,mkI integrated elements of artistic modernism into his works, l-rom the perspec- 
liw of Evolas conception of tradition, therefore, he was a poor representative of 
ihc Hindu tradition. 

47 



48 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



E METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



49 



correction of a viewpoint and the supra-traditional understanding 
which are among the first necessities for the New Italian. For too 
long we have permitted an artificial antithesis between East and 
West: artificial because, as Mussolini has already pointed out, 
it opposes to the East the modern and materialistic West, which, 
in fact, has little in common with the older, truer and greater 
Western civilisation. The modern West is just as opposed to the 
ancient West as it is to the East. As soon as we refer to previous 
times we are effectively in the presence of an ethnic and cultural 
heritage which is, to a large extent, common to both, and which 
can only be described as 'Indo-European'. The original ways of 
life, the spirituality and the institutions of the first colonisers of 
India and Iran have many points of contact not only with those 
of the Hellenic and Nordic peoples, but also with those of the 
original Romans themselves. 

The traditions to which we have previously referred offer 
examples of this: most notably, a common spiritual conception 
of how to wage war, how to act and die heroically - contrary to 
the views of those who, on the basis of prejudices and platitudes, 
cannot hear of Hindu civilisation without thinking of nirvana, 
fakirs, escapism, negation of the 'Western' values of personhood 
and so on. 

The text to which we have alluded and on which we will 
base our discussion is presented in the form of a conversation 
between the warrior Arjuna and the divine Krishna, who acts as 
the spiritual master of the former. The conversation takes place 
shortly before a battle in which Arjuna, the victim of humanitar- 
ian scruples, is reluctant to participate. In the previous article we 
have already indicated that, from a spiritual point of new, the two 
persons, Arjuna and Krishna, are in reality one. They represent 
two different parts of the human being - Arjuna the principle 
of action, and Krishna that of transcendent knowledge. The 
conversation can thus be understood as a sort of monologue, 
developing a progressive inner clarification and solution, both in 
the heroic and the spiritual sense, of the problem of the warrior's 
activity which poses itself to Arjuna as he prepares for battle. 



Now, the pity which prevents the warrior from fighting when 
Ik recognises among the ranks of the enemy some of his erstwhile 
1 riends and closest relatives is described by Krishna, that is to say 
I >v the spiritual principle, as 'impurities.. .not at all befitting a man 
w ho knows the value of life. They lead not to higher planets but 
io infamy' (2:2). 3 

We have already seen diis theme appear many times in the 
uaditional teachings of the West: '[EJither you will be killed on 
i he battlefield and attain the heavenly planets, or you will conquer 
and enjoy the earthly kingdom. ITierefore, get up with determina- 
liua and fight' (2:37). 

However, along with this, the motif of the 'inner war', to be 
fought at the same moment, is outlined: 'Thus knowing oneself 
to be transcendental to the material senses, mind and intelligence, 
( ) mighty-armed Arjuna, one should steady the mind by deliberate 
Ipiritual intelligence and thus - by spiritual strength - conquer 
i his insatiable enemy known as lust' (3:43). 

The internal enemy, which is passion, the animal thirst for 
life, is thus the counterpart of the external enemy. This is how 
i he right orientation is defined: 'Therefore, O Arjuna, surrender- 
ing all your works unto Me, with full knowledge of Me, without 
desires for profit, with no claims to proprietorship, and free fr< >m 
lethargy, fight' (3:30). 

This demand for a lucid, supra-conscious heroism rising above 
the passions is important, as is this excerpt, which brings out the 
character of purity and absoluteness which action should have so 
as to be considered 'sacred war*: 'Do thou fight for the sake of 
fighting, without considering happiness or distress, loss or gain, 
vn tory or defeat — and by so doing you shall never incur sin' (2:38). 

We find therefore that the only fault or sin is the state of an 
mmmplete will, of an action which, inwardly, is still far from 
i he height from which one's own life matters as little as those of 
others and no human measure has value any longer. 



\ From A. C. Bhaklivedanta Swami Prabhupada, Bhagavad-Gita as It Is. All quotes 
from the Bhagavad-gita are taken from this edition. 



50 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



1 1 1- METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



51 






It is precisely in this respect that the text in question contains 
considerations of an absolutely metaphysical order, intended to 
show how that which acts in the warrior at such a level is not so 
much a human force as a divine force. The teaching which Krishna 
(that is to say the 'knowledge' principle) gives to Arjuna (that is 
to say to the 'action' principle) to make his doubts vanish aims, 
first of all, at making him understand the distinction between 
what, as absolute spirituality, is incorruptible, and what, as the 
human and naturalistic element, exists only illusorily: Those who 
are seers of the truth have concluded diat of the non-existent 
[the material body] there is no endurance and of the eternal [the 
soul] there is no change. ... That which pervades the entire body 
you should know to be indestructible. No one is able to destroy 
that imperishable soul. ... Neither he who thinks the living entity 
the slayer nor he who thinks it slain is in knowledge, for the self 
slays not not is slain. ... He is not slain when the body is slain. 
... The material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and 
eternal living entity is sure to come to an end; therefore, fight...' 
(2:16,17,19,20,18). 

But there is more. The consciousness of the metaphysical 
unreality of what one can lose or can cause another to lose, such 
as die ephemeral life and the mortal body - a consciousness which 
corresponds to the definition of human existence as 'a mere pas- 
time' in one of the traditions which we have already considered 
- is associated with the idea that spirit, in its absoluteness and 
transcendence, can only appear as a destructive force towards 
everydiing which is limited and incapable of overcoming its own 
limited nature. Thus the problem arises of how the warrior can 
evoke the spirit, precisely in virtue of his being necessarily an 
instrument of destruction and death, and identify with it. 

The answer to this problem is precisely what we find in our 
texts. The God not only declares, C I am the strength of the strong, 
devoid of passion and desire. ... I am the original fragrance of the 
earth, and I am the heat in fire. I am the life of all that lives, and 
I am the penances of all ascetics. ... I am the original seed of all 
existences, die intelligence of die intelligent, and the prowess of 



ill powerful men' (7:1 1 , 9, 10), but, finally, the God reveals himself 
in Arjuna in the transcendent and fearful form of Lightning. We 
thus arrive at this general vision of life: like electrical bulbs too 
I >t tghdy lit, like circuits invested with too high a potential, human 
I mi tigs fall and die only because a power burns within them which 
transcends their finitude, which goes beyond everything they can 
ill > and want. This is why they develop, reach a peak, and then, as 
if < >\ erwhelmed by the wave which up to a given point had carried 
l hem forward, sink, dissolve, die and return to the unmanifest. 
hut the one who does not fear death, the one who is able, so to 
Npcak, to assume the powers of death by becoming everydiing 
n liich it destroys, overwhelms and shatters — this one finally passes 
I >v \ oiid limitation, he continues to remain upon the crest of the 
Mvc, he does not fall, and what is beyond life manifests itself 
within him. Thus, Krishna, the personification of the 'principle 
n| spirit 5 , after having revealed himself fully to Arjuna, can say, 
\ v ith the exception of you, all the soldiers here on both sides 
will be slain. Therefore get up. Prepare to fight and win glory. 
( « mquer your enemies and enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are 
jhvacly put to death by My arrangement, and you, [O Arjuna], 
c ,u) be but an instrument in the fight. ... Therefore, kill diem and 
#n not be disturbed. Simply fight, and you will vanquish your 
enemies in batde' (32-34). 

Wc see here again the identification of war with the 'path of 
God', of which we spoke in the previous article. The warrior 
< cases to act as a person. When he attains this level, a great non- 
human force transfigures his action, making it absolute and 'pure* 
precisely at its extreme. Here is a very evocative image belonging 
to ihe same tradition: 'Life — like a bow; the mind — like the arrow; 
t he target to pierce — the supreme spirit; to join mind to spirit as 
fthc shot arrow hits its target.' 

This is one of the highest forms of metaphysical justifica- 
tion i if war, one of the most comprehensive images of war as 
sue red war 5 . 



52 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



I M I M ETAPH YSICS OF WAR 



53 



To conclude this excursion into the forms of heroic tradition, 
as presented to us by many different times and peoples, we will 
only add a few final words. 

We have made this voyage into a world which, to some, 
could seem outre 4 and irrelevant, out of curiosity, not to display 
peculiar erudition. We have undertaken it instead with the precise 
intention of showing that the sacrality of war, that is to say, that 
which provides a spiritual justification for war and the necessity 
of war, constitutes a tradition in die highest sense of the term: it 
is something which has appeared always and everywhere, in the 
ascending cycle of every great civilisation; while the neurosis of 
war, the humanitarian and pacifist deprecation of it, as well as 
the conception of war as a 'sad necessity' or a purely political or 
natural phenomenon - none of this corresponds to any tradition. All 
this is but a modern fabrication, born yesterday, as a side-effect 
of die decomposition of the democratic and materialistic civilisa- 
tion against which today new revolutionary forces are rising up. 
In this sense, everything which we have gathered from a great 
variety of sources, constandy separating die essential from the 
contingent, the spirit from the letter, can be used by us as an inner 
fortification, as a confirmation, as a strengthened certainty Not 
only docs a fundamentally virile instinct appear justified by it on 
a superior basis, but also the possibility presents itself of deter- 
mining the forms of the heroic experience which correspond to 
our highest vocation. 

Here we must refer to the first article of this series, in which 
we showed that diere can be heroes of very different sorts, even 
of an animalistic and sub-personal sort; what matters is not 
merely the general capacity to throw oneself into combat and 
to sacrifice oneself, but also the precise spirit according to which 
such an event is experienced. But we now have all the elements 
needed to specify, from all the varied ways of understanding, the 
heroic experience, which may be considered the supreme one, 
and which can make the identification of war with the 'path of 



• m n P really true, and can make one recognise, in the hero, a form 
hi 1 1 ivinc manifestation. 

Another previous consideration must be recalled, namely, that 
\ \ht warrior's vocation really approaches this metaphysical peak 

• ml reflects the impulse to what is universal, it cannot help but 
h ml towards an equally universal manifestation and end for his 
i m *•; t hat is to say, it cannot but predestine that race for empire. For only 
i 1 1 1 empire as a superior order in which &pax trwmphalh 5 is in force, 
.i In tost ns the earthly reflection of the sovereignty of the 'supra- 

m ii It I,' is adapted to forces in the field of spirit which reflect the 
Hirtil and free energies of nature, and are able to manifest the 
i ha meter of purity, power, irresistibility and transcendence over 
fll p.nhos, passion and human limitation. 



4 French: *lo go to excess*. 



<\\\\v. 'peace through victory'. 



'ARM Y' AS VISION OF THE WORLD 



55 







'Army' as Vision of the World 1 



Undoubtedly, the new Fascist generation already possesses 
a broadly military, warlike orientation, but it has not yet 
grasped the necessity of integrating the details of simple discipline 
and psychophysical training into a superior order, a general vision 
of life. 

The ethical aspect 

One begins to see this when one studies our ancient traditions, 
which, certainly not by chance, so often used a symbolism taken 
from fighting, serving and asserting oneself heroically, to express 
purely spiritual realities. The group of initiates was called stratos, 
or 'army', in Orphisrn; miles expressed a degree of the Mithraic 
hierarchy; symbols of agony always recur in the sacred repre- 
sentations of classic Romanity, and passed, in part, to Christian 
asceticism itself. 

But here we shall deal with something more precise than mere 
analogies, namely, the related doctrine of 'holy war\ of which we 
have spoken previously in our books, as well as in these pages. We 
shall confine ourselves to the ethical field and refer to a special 
and central attitude, calculated to bring about a radical change of 
meaning in the whole field of values, and to raise it to a plane of 



manliness, separating it completely from all bourgeois attitudes, 
hnmanitarianism, moralism and limp conformism. 

The basis of this attitude is summed up in Paul's well-known 
phrase, vita est militia super terram. It is a matter of conceiving the 
being here below as having been sent in the guise of a man on a 
mission of military service to a remote front, the purpose of diis 
mission not always being direcdy sensed by the individual (in the 
|ji me manner that one who fights in the outposts cannot always 
It n m a precise idea of the overall plan to which he contributes), 
but in which inner nobleness is always measured by the fact of 
insisting, of accomplishing, in spite of all, what must be accom- 
plished, in the fact of not doubting, nor hesitating, in the fact of 
,\ fidelity stronger than life or death. 

The first results of this view are an affirmative attitude with 
i espect to the world; assertion and, at the same time, a certain 
1 1 cedom. He who is really a soldier is so by nature, and therefore 
hecause he wants to be so; in the missions and tasks which are 
Hiven to him, consequendy, he recognises himself, so to speak. 

I likewise, the one who conceives his existence as being that of 
i soldier in an army will be very far from considering the world 
14 .1 vale of tears from which to flee, or as a circus of irrational 
events at which to throw himself blindly, or as a realm for which 
mrpv diem 1 constitutes the supreme wisdom. Though he is not 
unaware of the tragic and negative side of so many things, his way 
« »l ivacting to them will be quite different from that of all other 
men. His feeling that this world is not his Fatherland, and that it 
it< m;s not represent his proper condition, so to speak - his feeling 

I I int, basically, he 'comes from afar' — will remain a fundamental 
dement which will not give rise to mystical escapism and spiritual 
Weakness, but rather will enable him to minimise, to relativise, to 
Defer to higher concepts of measure and limit, all that can seem 
im|M>rtant and definitive to others, starting with death itself, and 
\\ ill confer on him calm force and breadth of vision. 



I Originally published on 30 May 1937 as *Sulla "Milizia" quale visione del mondo' 
in 'Diorama mensile', // Regime Fascista. 



54 



Lalin: 'seize the day'. 



56 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



\I'MY' AS VISION OF THE WORLD 



57 



The Social Aspect 

The military conception of life, then, leads to a new sense of 
social and political solidarity. It goes beyond all humanitarianism 
and 'socialism': men are not our 'brothers', and our 'neighbour' 
is in a way an insolent concept. Society is neither a creature of 
necessity, nor something to be justified or sublimated on the basis 
of the ideal of honeyed universal love and obligatory altruism. 
Every society will instead be essentially conceived in the terms 
of the solidarity existing between quite distinct beings, each one 
determined to protect the dignity of its personality, but neverthe- 
less united in a common action which binds them side by side, 
without sentimentalism, in male comradeship. Fidelity and sincer- 
ity, with the ethics of honour to which they give rise, will thus be 
seen as the true basis of every community. According to ancient 
Indo-Germanic legislation, killing did not appear to be as seri- 
ous a fault as betrayal, or even mere lying. A warlike ethics would 
also lead to more or less this attitude and it would be inclined to 
limit the principle of solidarity by means of those of dignity and 
affinity. The soldier can regard as comrades only those whom 
he holds in esteem and who are resolute to hold to their posts, 
not those who give way, the weak or the inept. Besides, the one 
who guides has the duty of gathering and pushing forward the 
valid forces, rather than wasting them on concern and lament 
for those who have already fallen, or have yielded or have landed 
themselves in mls-de-sac. 

Sense of Stoicism 

However, the views we put forward here are most valuable in terms 
of inner strengthening. Here we enter in the field of a properly 
Roman ethics, with which the reader should already be familiar 
through those excerpts from classical authors which are published 
on a regular basis in the T>iorama > . As we have stated previously, we 
speak here of an inner change, by virtue of which one's reactions 
towards facts and life-experiences become absolutely different, 
and, rather than being negative, as they are generally, become 
positive and constructive. Stoic Romanity offers us an excellent 



inflight into this, provided that it is known as it really was, as true 
uul indomitable life-affirmation, far from the preconceived opin- 
u his which endeavour to make us see in the Stoic only a stiffened, 
lunlencd being become foreign to life. Can one really doubt this, 

lien Seneca 3 affirms the true man as superior to a god, since, 
s\ hilc ihe latter is protected by nature from misfortune, man can 
meet the latter, challenge it, and show himself superior to it? Or 
\ hen he calls unhappy those who have never been so, since they 
luve never managed to know and to measure their force? In these 
IUI hors precisely one can find many elements for a warlike system 
nl ethics, which revolutionises completely the common manner 
* f| thinking. A very characteristic aspect of this viewpoint is this: 
thr one who is sent off to a dangerous place curses his fate only 
il tie is a vile person; if he is a heroic spirit, he is instead proud of 
ti . since he knows that his commander chooses the worthiest and 
1 1 1 ingest for any risky mission and for any post of responsibility, 
l<\i\ mg the most convenient and secure posts only to those whom 
he basically does not hold in esteem. 

This same thought is appropriate to the most dark, tragic, 
hi ou raging moments of life: it is necessary to discover in these 
« il lie r a hidden providentiality or an appeal to our nobility and 
uupenority. 

'Who is worthy of the name of Man, and of Roman', Seneca 

rites precisely, 'who does not want to be tested and does not 

il k ili for a dangerous task? For the strong man inaction is torture. 

I 'here is only one sight able to command the attention even of a 

y\ k\, and it is that of a strongman battling with bad luck, especially 

1 1 he has himself challenged it.' 

'This is a wisdom, besides, which is taken from ancient ages, 
m*l finds a place even in a general conception of the history of 
the world. If Hesiod, before the spectacle of the Age of Iron, 
the dark and deconsecrated age which is identified as the last 
um\ exclaimed, 'If only then 1 did not have to live [in the Age of 



t Seneca (4 BC-65 AD) was a noted Roman writer and philosopher. He commit- 
ted suicide after being accused of involvement in an assassination plot against Lhc 
Kmpcror Nero. 



58 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



Iron], bat couJd have either died first or been born afterwards!', 4 
a teaching peculiar to the ancient Indo-Ger manic traditions was 
that precisely diose who, in the dark age, resist in spite of all wiJJ 
be able to obtain fruits which those who lived in more favourable, 
less hard, periods could seldom reach. 

Thus the vision of one's life as membership within an army 
gives shape to an ethic of its own and to a precise inner attitude 
which arouses deep forces. On this basis, to seek membership in 
an actual army, with its disciplines and its readiness for absolute 
action on the plane of material struggle, is the right direction 
and the path which must be followed. It is necessary to first feel 
oneself to be a soldier in spirit and to render one's sensibility in 
accordance with that in order to be able to do this also in a material 
sense subsequently, and to avoid the dangers which, in the sense 
of a materialistic hardening and overemphasis on the purely physi- 
cal, can otherwise come from militarisation on the external plane 
alone: whereas, given this preparation, any external form can easily 
become the symbol and instrument of properly spiritual meanings. 

A Fascist system of ethics, if thought through thoroughly, 
cannot but be directed along those lines. 'Scorn for the easy life' 
is the starting point The further points of reference must still be 
placed as high as possible, beyond everything which can speak 
only to feeling and beyond all mere myth. 

If the two most recent phases of the involutionary process 
which has led to the modern decline are first, the rise of the 
bourgeoise, and second, the collectivisation not only of the idea 
of the State, but also of all values and of the conception of ediics 
itself, then to go beyond all this and to reassert a 'warlike' vision 
of life in die aforementioned full sense must constitute the pre- 
condition for any reconstruction: when the world of the masses 
and of the materialistic and sentimental middle classes gives way 
to a world of 'warriors', the main thing will have been achieved, 
which makes possible die coming of an even higher order, that 
of true traditional spirituality. 



Hesiod, Theogony (Cambridge: Harvard University Press/The Loeb Classical 
Library, 2006), pp. 101-102. 



Race and War 



One of the most serious obstacles to a purely biological 
formulation of the doctrine of race is the fact that cross- 
I »i » ?filing and contamination of the blood are not the only cause 
i >1 I he decline and decay of races. Races may equally degenerate 
.mil i'ome to their end because of a process - so to speak — of 
inner extinction, without the participation of external factors. In 
pMirl biological terms this may correspond to those enigmatic 
'inner variations' (idiovariations) which science has been forced to 
nt( »gnise are just as powerful as variations due to cross-breeding 
in bringing about mutations. 

' I his will never be completely understood if the biological con- 
- cprion of race is not integrated with that 'racism of the second 
,ti u I of the third degree' of which we have repeatedly spoken here. 
Ins only if race is considered as existing not only in the body, but 
iUo in the soul and in the spirit, as a deep, meta-biological force 
Which conditions both the physical and die psychical structures 
m i lie organic totality of die human entity — it is only if this emi- 
nently traditional point of view is assumed — that the mystery of 
i he decline of races can be fathomed in all its aspects. One can 
I hen realise that, in a way analogous to the individual abdication 
iiul inner breakdown of the individual, where the loss of all moral 
inision and the attitude of passive abandonment can gradually 



J ( )riginally published on 20 October 1 939 as *La rafcza e la gucrra' in La Difesa della 
Huzza. 



59 






60 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



I'V I AMD WAR 



61 



find expression in a true physical collapse, or can paralyse natural 
organic resources far more efficiently than any threat to the body 
- so developments of the same nature can occur on the plane 
of those greater entities which are human races, on the greater 
scale in space and in time of their aggregate life spans. And what 
we have just pointed out about organic resources neutralised, 
when the inner - moral and spiritual - tension of an individual 
is lacking, can even allow us to consider less simplistically and 
less materialistically the matter of racial alterations due to mixing 
and contamination, as well. 

This is quite similar to what happens in infections- It is known, 
in fact, that bacteria and microbes are not always the sole effective 
and unilateral causes of illness: for a disease to be acquired by con- 
tagion a certain more or less strong predisposition is necessary The 
state of integrity or tonicity of the organism, in turn, conditions 
this predisposition, and this is greatly affected by the spiritual factor, 
the presence of the whole being to himself, and his state of inner 
intrepidity or anguish. In accordance with this analogy, we may 
believe that, for cross-breeding to have a really, fatally, inexorably 
degenerative outcome for a race, it is necessary without exception 
that this race already be damaged inwardly to a certain extent, and 
that the tension of its original will be lax as a result. 

When a race has been reduced to a mere ensemble of atavistic 
automatisms, which have become the sole surviving vestiges of 
what it once was, then a collision, a lesion, a simple action from 
outside, is enough to make it fall, to disfigure it and to denature 
it In such a case, it does not behave like an elastic body, ready to 
react and to resume its original shape after die collision (provided, 
that is, that the latter does not exceed certain limits and does not 
produce permanent actual damage), but, rather, it behaves like 
a rigid, inelastic body, which passively endures the imprint of 
external action. 

On the basis of dicse considerations two practical tasks of 
racism can be distinguished. The first task could be said to be 
one of passive defence. This means sheltering the race from all 
external actions (crossings, unsuitable forms of life and culture, 



• k.) which could present the danger to it of a crisis, a mutation or 
n denaturation. The second task, in contrast, is active resistance, 
,11 kI consists in reducing to a minimum the predisposition of the 
i m r ti > degeneration, that is to say, the ground on which it can be 
Deposed passively to external action. This means, essentially, 'to 

\\C its inner race; to see to it that its intimate tension is never 
Li< king; that, as a counterpart of its physical integrity, within it 
ilutv is something like an uncontrollable and irreducible fire, 
ilw :n s yearning for new material to feed its blaze, in the form of 
new obstacles, which defy it and force it to reassert itself. 

This second task is obviously more arduous than the first, 
because it can demand solutions which vary from individual to 
individual, and because external, general and material measures 
.ii v of little use for it. It is a matter of overcoming the inertia of 

• pitit, that force of gravity which is in force in human interiority 
no less than in the outer, physical world, and here finds expres- 

•»on precisely in the inclination to abandonment, to 'take it easy*, 

10 always follow the path of least resistance. But, unfortunately, 
lor* the individual as well as for the race, to overcome this danger 
ii is necessary to have a support - for the ability to act directly, to 
llways remain at the crest of the wave, to maintain an inner initia- 
ifvc which is always renewed, without the need for renewed stimuli, 
< .in only occur as the result of an exceptional endowment, and 

• ,i nnot reasonably be demanded as a matter of course. As we have 
d id, for tension which has become latent to reawaken before it is 
fori late and the processes of the automatisation of race follow, an 
obstacle, a test, almost a challenge, is necessary It is then that the 

1 1 isis and the decision occur: by their way of reacting, the deeper, 
meta-biologicai powers of the race then show whether they have 
i rmained stronger than the contingencies and the destinies of die 
pven period of history. In the case of a positive reaction, new 
potentialities come from deep inside to again saturate the racial 
i rrcuit A new ascending cycle begins for that race. 

In some cases, it is even possible that precision cross-breeding 

naturally kept within very stringent limits - carries out a function 

of that kind. This is well-known in zootechnics. The 'pure breed 5 in 



62 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



HACIAXnWAR 



some animal species is both the result of the preservation of hered- 
ity and of judicious cross-breeding. We do not share the opinion 
of Chamberlain, 2 who was inclined to apply this kind of thinking 
to the 'superior races' of humanity. However, it is a well-proven 
fact that in some aristocratic famiJies, which, with their centuries- 
old blood law, have been the only experimental field for racism in 
history so far, some cross-breedings have had precisely the merit 
of preventing extinction of the Une through inner degeneration. 
Here — let us stress - the cross-breeding has the function of an 
ordeal, not a rule - an ordeal, moreover, which can also present 
a dangerous challenge for the blood. But danger reawakens the 
spirit. Before the heterogeneous element introduced by cross- 
breeding, the homogenous nucleus is called to reaffirm itself, to 
assimilate to himself what is alien, to act towards it in the capacity 
of the 'dominant' towards the 'recessive', in terms of the Laws 
of Mendel. 3 If the reaction is positive, die result is an awakening. 
The stock which seemed spent and exhausted reawakens. But if 
it has already fallen too much, or if the heterogeneity is excessive, 
the ordeal fails and the decline is quick and definitive. 

But the highest instrument of the inner awakening of race 
is combat, and war is its highest expression. That pacifism and 
humanitarianism are phenomena closely linked to internation- 
alism, democracy, cosmopolitanism and liberalism is perfecdy 
logical - the same anti-racial instinct present in some is reflected 
and confirmed in the others. The will towards sub-racial levelling 
inborn in internationalism finds its ally in pacifist humanitarian- 
ism, which has the function of preventing the heroic test from 
disrupting the game by galvanising the surviving forces of any 
remaining not completely deracinated peoples. It is odd, however, 
and illustrates the errors to which a unilaterally biological formu- 



63 



Houston Stewart Chamberlain (1855-1927) was one of the most influential racial 
theorists of the early Twentieth century. His most important work was The Founda- 
tions of the Nineteenth Century (New York: John Lane, 1910). 

Gregor Johann Mendel (1822-1884) was a Czech-German scientist, and is often 
called 'the father of modern genetics'. Mendel's Laws of Inheritance, based on his 
study of plants across several generations, attempted to define how specific char- 
acteristics are transmitted from parents to their offspring. 



I nil hi of the racial problem can lead, that the racial theory of 
nils selections', as expressed for example by Vacher de Lapouge/* 
I >.i 1 \ nkes, to a certain extent, of the same incomprehension of the 
pi > itive meaning of war for race - but here, in the face of full 
Knowledge of the facts — as is found in internationalist democ- 
i.iiism. To be specific, they suppose that every war turns into a 

I >t i >y I'cssive elimination of the best, of the exponents of the still- 
pi ire race of die various peoples, thus facilitating an involution. 

This is a partial view, because it only considers what is lost 

iluough the disappearance of some individuals, not what is 

irouscd to a much greater extent in others by the experience 

nt war, which otherwise would never have been aroused. This 

lu'comcs even more obvious if we do not consider ancient wars 

1 1 1 uli were largely fought by elites while the lower strata were 

pared by them, but rather modern wars which engage entire 

n i net! nations and which, moreover, in their character of total- 

H v, involve not only physical but also moral and spiritual forces 

hi combatants and non-combatants alike. The Jew Ludwig 5 

expressed fury about an article published in a German military 

I I \ icw which brought out the possibilities of selection related to 
nil bombardments, in which the testof sang-froid, the immediate, 
I(H ill reaction of the instinct of direction in opposition to brutal 
mi t onfused impulse, cannot but result in a decisive discrimina- 
riun of those who have the greatest probability of escaping and 

urviving from those who do not 

The indignation of the humanitarian Jew Ludwig, who has 
become the bellicose propagator of the 'new Holy Alliance' 
against fascism, is powerless against what is truthful in consider- 
,i t ions of this sort. If the next world war is a 'total war' it will also 

•I Ucorges Vacher de Lapouge (1854-1936) was a French anthropologist, socialist, 
and racial theorist. He was the author of UAryen: son role social (The Aryan and 
His Social Role), published in Paris in 1899 and never translated into English. In 
this work he classified the various races, and proposed that the European Aryans 
arc in opposition to the Jews as racial archetypes. His ideas were highly influential 
upon the racialist and eugenics movements. 

I Kmil Ludwig (1881-1948) was primarily known at the time as the author of a 
number of popular biographies of historical figures, including Goethe, Bismarck 
and Mussolini. 



64 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR |t\< K AND WAR 



65 



mean a 'total test' of the surviving racial forces of the modern 
world. Without doubt, some will collapse, whereas others will 
awake and rise. Nameless catastrophes could even be die hard but 
necessary price of heroic peaks and new liberations of primordial 
forces dulled through grey centuries. But such is the fatal condi- 
tion for the creation of any new world - and it is a new world 
that we seek for the future. 

What we have said here must be considered as a mere intro- 
duction to the question of the significance which war has, in 
general, for race. Three fundamental points should be considered 
in conclusion. First, since we proceed from the assumption that 
there is a fundamental difference between human races - a dif- 
ference which, according to the doctrine of the three degrees of 
racism, 6 is not restricted to corporeality but concerns also soul 
and spirit - it should be expected that the spiritual and physical 
behaviour towards die experience or test of war varies between 
the various races; it will therefore be both necessary and interest- 
ing to define the sense according to which, for each specific race, 
the aforementioned reaction will occur. 

Second, it is necessary to consider the interdependent rela- 
tionship between what a well-understood racial policy can do to 
promote the aims of war, and, conversely, what war, in the pre- 
supposition of a correct spiritual attitude, can do to promote die 
aims of race. We can speak, in this respect, of a sort of germ, or 
primary nucleus, created initially or reawakened by racial policy, 
which brings out racial values in the consciousness of a people; 
a germ or nucleus which will bear fruit by giving the war a value, 
while conversely the experience of war, and the instincts and cur- 
rents of deep forces which emerge through such an experience, 
give the racial sense a correct, fecund direction. 

And this leads us to the third and last point. People are accus- 
tomed to speaking too generally, and too romantically, about 
'heroism', 'heroic experience' and the like. When they are done 



For more on Evolas theory of race, see 'Julius Evolas Concept of Race: A Racism 
of Three Degrees' by Michael Bell at Counter-Currents, www.counter-currents. 
com/201 1/02/julius-evolas-concept-of-race/. Available as of 26 April 201 1. 






• iili such romantic assumptions, in modern times, there seem to 
M main only material ones, such that men who rise up and fight 

in ( onsidered simply as 'human material', and the heroism of 
ili* « ombatants is related to victory as merely a means to an end, 
»lu end itself being nothing but the increase of the material and 

I I onomic power and territory of a given state. 

I n view of the considerations which have been pointed out 
In u\ it is necessary to change these attitudes. From the 'ordeal 
l»\ lire' of the primordial forces of race and heroic experience, 
above all other experience, has been a means to an essentially 
piniual and interior end. But there is more: heroic experience 
> Itl f nentiates itself in its results not only according to the various 
i i • ts, but also according to the extent to which, within each race, 
i nper-race has formed itself and come to power. The various 

? li imocs of this creative differentiation correspond to so many 

• ,i v s of being a hero and to so many forms of awakening through 
In (oic experience. On the lowest plane, hybrid, essentially vital, 
i»« nnctive and collective forces emerge — this is somewhat similar 
m i he awakening on a large scale of the 'primordial horde' by the 

nhdarity, unity of destiny and holocaust which is peculiar to it 
< rrntl ually, this mosdy naturalistic experience is purified, dignified, 
I ml becomes luminous until it reaches its highest form, which 
• f >i responds to the Aryan conception of war as 'holy war', and 

? ?I victory and triumph as an apex, since its value is identical to 
l he values of holiness and initiation, and, finally, of death on the 
li iiilefield as mors trutmphalis^ as not a rhetorical but an effective 
nvriroming of death. 

I laving indicated all these points in a basic but, we trust, suf- 

f ic lend} intelligible manner, we propose to tackJe them one by one 

in writings which will follow the present one, each of which will 

I iccifically consider the varieties of heroic experience according 

I I I race and then the vision of war peculiar to the Nordic- Aryan 
nul Ario-Roman tradition in particular. 



\v<> III ROISMS 



61 



Two Heroisms 1 



To pursue our previous discussions about the varied meanings 
that the fact of war and the experience of heroism can 
represent for the race it is necessary to briefly explain the concept 
of the c super-race ? and the related distinction between races as 
given by 'nature' and races in the higher, human and spiritual sense. 

According to the traditional view, man as such is not reducible 
to purely biological, instinctive, hereditary, naturalistic deter- 
minisms; if all this has its part, which is wrongly neglected by a 
spiritualism of dubious value, the fact still remains that man dis- 
tinguishes himself from the animal insofar as he participates also 
in a super-natural, super-biological element, solely in accordance 
with which he can be free and be himself. Generally, these two 
aspects of the human being are not necessarily in contradiction 
with one another. Although it obeys its own laws, which must 
be respected, that which in man is 'nature' allows itself to be the 
organ and instrument of expression and action of that in him 
which is more than 'nature'. It is only in the vision of life pecu- 
liar to Semitic peoples, and above all to the Jewish people, that 
corporeality becomes 'flesh 5 , as root of every sin, and irreducible 
antagonist of spirit. 

We should apply this way of seeing the individual to these 
vaster individualities which are races. Some races can be compared 



i * 



< < 



1 Originally published on 20 November 1939 as 'Due eroismi* in La Difesa delta 
Razza. 

66 






u » flu* animal, or to the man who, degrading himself, has passed 
It i » purely animalistic way of life: such are the 'races of nature'. 

I Itev arc not illuminated by any superior element; no force from 
ibovc supports them in the vicissitudes and contingencies with 
whu h their life in space and in time presents them. In these 
on Icals, what predominates in them is the collectivist element, in 
the form of instinct, 'genius of the species', or spirit and unity 
Ml (he horde. Broadly speaking, the feeling of race and blood 
litre <.an be stronger and surer than in other peoples or stocks: 
h» vcrtheless, it always represents something sub-personal and 
nnplctely naturalistic, such as, for example, the dark 'totemism' 
savage populations, in which the totem, which is in a way the 
mystical entity of the race or tribe but meaningfully associated 
iih a given animal species, is conceived as something prior to 
• n h individual, as soul of its soul, not in the abstract, in theory, 
liuf in every expression of daily life. Having referred to the sav- 
iflts, incidentally, and reserving the right to return eventually to 
I he argument involved, we must indicate the error of those who 
nsider the savages as 'primitives', that is, as the original forms of 

uiinanity; from which, according to the usual mendacious theory 
he inferior miraculously giving rise to the superior, superior 
t tecs would have 'evolved 5 . In many cases it is exactly the contrary 

v liich is true. Savages, and many races which we can consider as 
'natural', are only the last degenerate remnants of vanished, far 
mnterior, superior races and civilisations, even the name of which 
has often not reached us. This is why the presumed 'primitives' 
who still exist today do not tend to 'evolve', but rather disappear 
? iHinitively and become extinct. 

In other races, however, the naturalistic element is, so to speak, 
l he vehicle of a superior, super- biological element, which is to 
i he former what the spirit is to the body. Such an element almost 
always becomes incarnated in the tradition of such races and in 
I he elite which embodies this tradition and keeps it alive. Here, 
therefore, there is a race of the spirit behind the race of body 
|nd blood in which the latter expresses the former in a more or 



< 4 > 



I i 



68 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



I WO HEROISMS 



69 



1 1 



less perfect manner according to the circumstances, individuals, 
and often castes, in which this race is articulated. 

The truth of this is clearly felt wherever, in symbolic form, 
Antiquity attributed 'divine' or 'celestial* origins to a given race or 
caste. In this context, therefore, purity of blood, or the lack of it, 
is no longer sufficient to define the essence and rank of a given 
race. Where the regime of the castes was in force every caste could 
obviously be considered 'pure* because the law of endogamy or 
non-mixing applied to all of diem. Not to have merely pure blood, 
but to have - symbolically - 'divine 5 blood, instead defined the 
superior caste or race with respect to the plebeian one, or to what 
we have called the 'race of nature*. Hence the fact that, in the 
ancient Indo-Germanic civilisations of the East, the community 
or spiritual race of the arya identified itself with that of the dvija, 
the 'twice-born* or 'reborn': this was a reference to a supernatural 
element pertaining to it, to latent gifts of 'race' in a superior sense, 
which a special ritual, compared to a second birth or to a regenera- 
tion, had to progressively confirm in the individual. But maybe 
we will have to go back over diis also; these points are, however, 
sufficient for the argument which we now intend to make. 

We need only add that, if we look at humanity today, not 
only is it difficult to find a group which maintains one race of 
the body or another in the pure state, but it should unfortunately 
also be recognised that the general distinction between naturalistic 
races and superior races, or super-races, becomes in very many 
cases extremely uncertain: often, modern man has lost both the 
steadiness of instinct of the 'races of nature' and the superior- 
ity and metaphysical tension of the 'super-race'. He looks rather 
like what primitive peoples in reality, and not in die view of 
evolutionists, are: beings which, even though they proceed from 
originally superior races, have degraded themselves to animalistic, 
naturalistic, amorphous and semi-collectivist ways of life. What 
Landra 2 has accurately described in these pages as 'the race of 
the bourgeois', of the petty conformist and right-thinking man, 



Guido Landra was an anthropologist, and was the first director of the Office of 
Racial Studies, a department within the Ministry of Popular Culture of Fascist Italy. 



I Ik- 'advanced' spirit who invents a superiority for himself on the 
kisis of rhetoric, empty speculations and exquisite aestheticisms: 
»lii" pacifist, the social climber, the neutralist humanitarian, all diis 
li.ilf-extinguished material of which so significant a part of the 

I I u klcrn world is made up, is actually a product of racial degencra- 
tum, the expression of the deep crisis of the Man of the West, 
,i II the more tragic as it is not even felt as such. 

Let us now come to the fact of war and the experience of 
heroism. Both, we have claimed in our previous writings, are 
instruments of awakening. An awakening, however, of what? War, 
r perienced, determines a first selection; it separates the strong 
from the weak, the heroes from the cowards. Some fall, others 
assert themselves. But this is not enough. Various ways of being 
h* roes, various meanings, can arise in heroic experience. From 
Itch race, a different, specific reaction must be expected. Let us 
ignore this fact for now and follow instead the 'phenomenology' 
t\\~ the awakening of race determined by war, that is, the various 
I vpical modalities of this awakening, working theoretically on the 
distinction which has just been made ('race of nature' and 'super- 
i ace') and practically on the concrete aspect, that is to say the fact 
that, since it is no longer specialised warlike elites but masses 
which face war, war therefore to a great extent concerns the 
mixed, bourgeois, half-degraded type, whom we have described 
above as a product of crisis. 

To put such a product of crisis to the test of fire, to impose 
upon him a fundamental alternative, not theoretical, but in terms 
of reality and even of life and death: this is the first healthy effect 
of the fact of war for race. Ignis essentim, in the terminology of 
undent alchemists: the fire which tests, which strips to the 'essence'. 

To follow this development more concretely we shall refer 
to die unique documentation which is found in famous authors 
such as, for example, Erich Maria Remarque and the French Rene 
Quinton.^ 



\ Ren£ Quinton ( 1 866- 1 925) was the author of Soldier's Testament: Selected Maxims 
of Rent Quinton (London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1930). This is the English version 
of the book discussed by Evola below. 






70 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



I Wn Ili'ROISMS 



' > 



Everyone knows Remarque as the author of the notorious 
novel AllQidet on the Western Front, 4 considered a masterpiece of 
defeatism. Our opinion in this matter is no different: it is never- 
theless worth examining this novel with the coldest objectivity. 
The characters of the novel are teenagers who were imbued 
as volunteers with every sort of 'idealism', resonant with that 
rhetorical, romantic and choreographically heroic conception 
of war spread by those people who, with fanfare and beautiful 
speeches, had limited themselves to accompanying them to the 
station. Once they have reached the front and have been caught 
in the true experience of modern war, they come to realise that 
it is something quite different and that none of the ideals and the 
aforementioned rhetoric can support them any longer. They do 
not become either vile wretches or traitors, but their inner being is 
transformed; it is an irremediably broken generation, even where 
the howitzers have spared it. They advance, they often become 
'heroes' - but as what? They feel war to be an elemental, imper- 
sonal, inhuman vicissitude, a vicissitude of unleashed forces, in 
which to survive is only possible by reawakening as beings made 
of instincts which are absolute, as lucid as they are inexorable, 
instincts almost independent from their persons. These are the 
forces which carry such youngsters forward, which lead them to 
assert themselves where others would have been broken, or would 
have been driven crazy, or would have preferred the fate of the 
deserters and die vile wretches: but, beyond this, no enthusiasm, 
n< > ideal, no light. To mark in a morbidly evocative manner the 
terrible anonymity of this vicissitude, in which the individual no 
longer counts, Remarque makes the book end with the death of 
the only young person in the original group who had escaped, 
and who dies almost at the threshold of the armistice, on a day so 
calm that the communiques confine themselves to this sentence: 
'Ail quiet on the western front'. 

Even leaving aside the fact that the author of this book actually 
was a combatant, it would be hard to say that processes of this sort 



71 



4 All Quiet on the Western Front (Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1929). Il is perhaps 
the most famous anti-war novel ever written. 






mi only 'novelistic', without relation to reality. The defeatism of 
lli i book, its insidious and deleterious side, lies rather in reducing 
flu whole war, that is, all the possibilities of the experience of 
• ii , io a single, certainly real, but particular, aspect of it; in fact 
• l«i . is merely the negative outcome of a test, which, however, 
« mi be overcome by others positively A point should be borne 
tn mind: the anti- bourgeois thesis. Up to this point, we can even 
i"ur with Remarque. War acts as a catharsis, as a 'purification': 
<••"/! mentiae. Beautiful words, beautiful feelings, rhetorical flights, 
ftivihs and watchwords, humanitarianism and verbose patriotism 
m swept away, and so is the petty person with the illusion of 
«i importance and its usefulness. All this is far too littfe. One 
i in the- face of pure forces. And, to resist, one must reawaken 
hi rwise as an embodiment of pure forces intimately connected 

i< 1 1 (he depth of race: forgetting one's own T, one's own life, 
flul il is precisely here that the two opposite possibilities show 
ili* mselves: once the superstructures of the e race of limbo', of 
ilit bourgeois, half-extinguished man, have been blown up, two 

iys of overcoming the 'human' are likewise open: the shift to 
ilir sub-human, or the shift to the super-human. In one case, 
i In beast reawakens; in die other, the hero in die true sense, the 
Mi* red and traditional sense; in the former, the 'race of nature 5 
n \ ives, and, in the latter, die 'super-race'. Remarque only knows 
i lu first solution. 

Some years ago, a work by Rene Quinton was published in 
1 1. 1 linn translation: Massime sulfa guerra. It represents another very 
"insular testimony. Eight times injured in the World War, repeat- 
ed!) decorated with the most coveted decorations, Quinton can 
r»b\ iously aspire to the generic qualification of 'hero'. But what 
i turning has this c hero' experienced in war? This book is die 
insurer. War is conceived and justified by Quinton biologically, 
in t lose dependency on the instincts of the species and 'natural 
i lei tion\ Some quotations: 

There are, at the base of any being, two motives: 
die egoistic one which drives him to conserve 




72 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



HEROISMS 



73 



his own life, and the altruistic one which leads 
him to forget himself, to sacrifice himself for 
a natural end which he does not know and 
which becomes identified with the benefit of 
the species. Thus, the weak, in the service of 
the species, attacks the more powerful, without 
prudence, without reason, without even hoping 
to win. The genius of the species commands 
him to attack and to gamble his life [...] The 
male and the female are created for the service 
of the species. The males are organised to fight 
each other [for the purpose of sexual selection]. 
War is their natural state, as for the female the 
sacred order is to conceive and then to nurture. 

Hence this singular conception of heroism: 

The hero does not act from a sense of duty, but 
from love [meaning: according to race instincts, 
which die sexual function obeys]. In war man 
is no longer man, he is only the male [...] War is 
a chapter of love — males become intoxicated 
with tearing each other to pieces. The drunken- 
ness of war is a drunkenness of love. 

The instrument of the species, of the race of the body, in a 
primordial outburst, according to Quinton: 

Thus, there is nothing sublime about the hero, 
nor about the heroic mother who rushes 
towards a fire in order to save her child: they 
are the born male and female. 






I * i indicate the conclusion that all this leads to, we will quote these 
tit i her excerpts from Quinton: 

Every ideal is a pretext to kill. Hatred is the 
most important thing in life. The wise men who 
no longer hate are ready for sterility and death. 
You must not understand the [enemy] peoples, 
you must hate them. The more man rises, the 
more his hatred for man grows. Nature has by 
no means created males, and peoples, in order 
for them to love each other. 



plie joy of hurting the adversary constitutes, then, one of the 
* .en rial elements of the hero. 



Socialised life is composed of merely artificial 
duties. War frees man from these and returns 
him to his primal instincts. 

In the evolutionis tic- biological framework of a view such as this, 
these instincts are essentially dependent on race, in the sense of 
ipecics. 

Just as it would be inaccurate to regard Remarque merely as a 
jjuindiced defeatist, so it would be inaccurate to regard Quinton 
merely as a combatant who, in trying to express his experiences 
I licoreticaMy, became a victim of the notorious theory of combat 
,is I he natural selection of the species. There is more. There is, 
despite several features of caricature and one-sidedness, a sign 
nf real life. Actually, the lion can arise from the sheep precisely 
tt i this sense. Man reawakens and resumes contact with the deep 
threes of life and race from which he had become alienated, but 
hi order to be no more than a *male 5 and, at best, a "magnificent 
I tenst of pre/*. In the realm of the 'races of nature 5 , this may 
I k normal, and the phenomena by which experiences of that 
aort are likely to be accompanied — horde solidarity, unity of 



74 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



WO HEROISMS 



destiny, etc. - may even have a healthy, reviving effect for a given 
organised ethnic group. But from the point of view of one who 
already belongs to a 'race of the spirit' this can only be his ordeal 
of fire turned into a fall. The catharsis, the amputation of the 
'bourgeois 5 excrescence brought about by war, here, exposes not 
what is superior to the ideal of personality but what is inferior 
to it, marking the borderline point of the involution of the race 
of the spirit into that of the body. To use the terms of ancient 
Aryan traditions, this is pitr-yana y the path of those who are dis- 
solved in dark ancestral forces, not deva-yana^ the 'path of gods'. 5 
Let us now consider the other possibility, that is, the case in 
which the experience of war turns into a restoration, an awak- 
ening, of the race of the spirit, or 'super-race'. We have already 
stated the normal relationship in the super-race between the 
biological element and the super-biological one, or, if we prefer, 
between the Vital' element and the properly spiritual one. The 
former must be considered as an instrument for the manifesta- 
tion and expression of the latter. Having this point of reference, 
the essentials of the positive solution can be expressed in a very 
simple formula: heroic experience and, in general, the experience 
of risk, of combat, of painful tension, must constitute for the 
individual one of those inner culminations in which the extreme 
intensity of life (qucf* biological element) is almost transformed 
into something more-than-life (the supra-biological element). 
This implies a freeing upwards from the confines of individuality 
and the assumption of the bursting upwards of the deeper side 
of one's own being as the instrument of a sort of active ecstasy, 
implying not the deepening but the transfiguration of personal- 
ity, and, with it, of aH lucid vision, precise action, command and 
domination. Such moments, such culminations of heroic experi- 
ence, not only do not exclude, but actually demand all the aspects 
of war that have an 'elemental', destructive, we could almost say 
telluric, character: precisely that which, in the eyes of the petty 
individuality and the petty T, the unwarlike 'intellectual 5 and the 



75 



m niimcntal humanitarian, has a baleful, deplorable, deleterious 
t luiracter for 'human values', and shows itself instead here to have 

I 'it tiua) value. Even death — death on the battlefield — becomes, 
hi i liis respect, a testimony to life; hence the Roman conception 
ul the mors triwnphalis and the Nordic conception of Valhalla as a 

I tl/icc of immortality exclusively reserved for 'heroes'. But there is 
more: the assumptions of such heroic experience seem to possess 
•in almost magical effectiveness: they are inner triumphs which 
! .in determine even material victory and are a sort of evocation 
cil divine forces intimately tied to 'tradition* and the 'race of the 
Ipirit' of a given stock. That is why, in the ritual of the triumph 
in R< imc, the victorious leader bore the insignia of die Capitoline 
divinity. 

These remarks are sufficient to allow the reader to anticipate 

I I mi what we say is not a mere 'theory' of ours, a philosophical 
I a isition or interpretation thought up by us. This doctrine of hcro- 
i m as a sacred and almost magical culmination, this mystical and 
.iscetic conception of fighting and of winning, itself expresses a 
precise tradition, today forgotten but extensively documented in 
the testimonies of ancient civilisations, and especially of Aryan 
ones. This is why, in a subsequent article, we propose to express 
i he same meanings by making ancient myths and symbols and 
rituals, Roman and Indo-Germanic, speak, which will clarify 
v^ hat, so far, we have had necessarily to expose in a synthetic and 
ftrncral form. 



5 This is discussed in the Upanisads, especially Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. 

6 Latin: 'by virtue of being' 



) U I- AND WAR: THE ARYAN CONCEPTION OF COMBAT 77 



ii . 






Race and War: The Aryan 
Conception of Combat 1 



In our previous article, dealing with the capacity of war and 
heroic experience to bring about an awakening of deep forces 
connected to the substratum of the race, we have seen that, 
in the most general way, two distinct, and indeed opposite, 
types appear. In the first type, the petty bourgeois personality 

- tamed, conformist, pseudo-intellectual or emptily idealistic 

- may undergo a disintegration, involving the emergence of 
elementary forces and instincts, in which the individual regresses 
to the pre-personal stage of the 'races of nature', which exhaust 
themselves in a welter of conservative and affirmative instincts. 
In the second type, in contrast, the most 'elemental* and non- 
human aspects of the heroic experience become a means of 
transfiguration, of elevation and integration of personality in 

- so to speak — a transcendent way of being. This constitutes an 
evocation of what we have called 'the race of the spirit', that is, 
of the spiritual element from 'above', which, in superior stocks, 
acts formatively on the purely biological part, and is at the root of 
their 'tradition' and of their prophetic greatness — simultaneously, 
from the point of view of the individual, these are experiences 
which Antiquity, and specifically Aryan antiquity, considered no 



1 Originally published on 20 December 1939 as 'La razza e la guerra: la concezione 
ariana del combattere* in La Difesa delta Razza. 

76 









ft rich in supernatural fruits than those of asceticism, holiness 
ami even initiation. Having thus recalled our point of departure, 
l» i us specify the subjects which we intend to develop further. 
I'ii st of all, as we have said, we want to present a brief account 
Inch makes it apparent that the aforementioned conception of 
Ik loism, fat from being the product of a particular speculation 
nl ours, or of an empty rhetorical projection, corresponds to 
i precise tradition which appears in a whole series of ancient 

• i llisations. In the second place, we want to develop the Aryan 

• < inception of Victory 5 , understood precisely as a 'mystical' value, 
i U iscly connected to an inner rebirth. Finally, passing to a more 

< uncrete plane, we want to see, in general terms, of what is the 
behaviour of the various races in relation to this order of ideas. 
|n the present article, we will deal thoroughly with the first point. 

Broadly speaking, we find that, especially among ancient 
\r van humanity, wars were thought of as images of a perennial 
h^Iu between metaphysical forces: on one hand there was the 

< Hvmpian and luminous principle, uranic and solar truth; on the 
mher hand there was raw force, the 'titanic', telluric element, 

I urbane* in the classical sense, the demonic-feminine principle 
t»{ chaos. This view continually recurs in Greek mythology in 

nrious symbolic forms; in still more precise and radical terms 
it uppcars in the general vision of the world of die Irano- Aryan 
u< cs, which considered themselves literally to be the armies of 
I he ( lod of Light in his struggle against the power of darkness; 
iJicy persist throughout the Middle Ages, often retaining their 
i lussical features in spite of the new religion. Thus, Frederick I of 

wvibia, 2 in his fight against the rebellious Commune, recalled the 
nymbol of Hercules and the arm with which this symbolic hero 
nl Dorian-Aryan and Achaean- Aryan stocks fought as all of the 
'< Myrnpian' forces against the dark creatures of chaos. 

This general conception, intimately experienced, could not 
lirlp but be reflected in more concrete forms of life and activity, 



fredcrick I (1 1 22- 1 1 90), also known as Barbarossa (Redbeard), was the Holy Roman 
Rmperor. He led six invasions of Italy, and was a Crusader. According to legend, 
he was also one of the holders of the Spear of Destiny (the Lance which pierced the 
side of Christ), and will one day return to restore Germany to its former greatness. 



78 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



raised to the symbolic and, we could almost say, 'ritual-like ? level. 
For our purposes, it is worth noting particularly the transforma- 
tion of war into the c padi of God' and 'greater holy war'. 

We omit deliberately here any documentation peculiar to 
Romanity because we will use this when dealing, in the next 
article, with the 'mysticism of victory'. We will begin instead with 
the testimonies, which are themselves very well-known, relating 
to the Nordic-Aryan tradition. Here, Valhalla is the place of an 
immortality reserved above all for heroes fallen on the battlefield. 
The Lord of this place, Odin or Wotan, is presented to us in the 
Ynglingasaga as having shown to the heroes, by his own symbolic 
self-sacrifice on the cosmic tree Yggdrasil, the path which leads 
to that divine sojourn, where they live eternally, as if on a dazzling 
luminous peak beyond the clouds. 

According to this tradition, no sacrifice or cult is more appre- 
ciated by the supreme God than that which is performed by the 
hero who fights and falls on the battlefield. In addition to this 
there is a sort of metaphysical counterpart reinforcing this view: 
the forces of the heroes who, having fallen and sacrificed them- 
selves to Odin, have gone beyond the limits of human nature, 
and then increase die phalanx which this god needs to fight the 
Ragna-tvkkr, that is, the 'darkening of the divine*, which has threat- 
ened the world since ancient times. In the \idda > in fact, it is said 
that 'no matter how great the number of the heroes gathered in 
Valhalla, they will never be too many for when the Wolf comes'. 
The "Wolf here is the symbol of a dark and wild power which, 
previously, had managed to chain and subdue the stock of the 
'divine heroes', or Aesir; the 'age of the Wolf* 3 is more or less the 
counterpart of the Age of Iron' in the Classical tradition, and of 
the 'dark age' - Kali-Yuga 4 - in die Indo-Aryan one: it alludes 



The Age of the Wolf is described in the 45th verse of the *Vdlusp£, or Prophecy of 
the Seeress, the first poem of the Norse Poetic Edda. The wolf age is said to be the 
age of brother turning against brother, constant warfare, widespread whoredom 
and hardship. It is the prelude to the end of the world, although the world is des- 
tined to be recreated afterward in an even more perfect form. See The Poetic Edda 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996). 

The last and darkest age in the Vedic, or Hindu> cycle of ages. 



i A CE AND WAR: THE ARYAN CONCEPTION OF COMBAT 79 

symbolically to an age of the unleashing of purely terrestrial and 
desecrated forces. 

It is important to note that similar meanings remain under the 
i Juistian outer garment in the Medieval ideology of the Crusades. 
The liberation of die Temple and the conquest of the Holy Land 
hud a much closer relationship than is commonly supposed with 
indent traditions relating to mystical Asgard, a distant land of 
heroes, where there is no death, and whose inhabitants enjoy an 
incorruptible life and supernatural calm. 'Holy war 5 appeared as 
a very spiritual war, so much so that it could be compared liter- 
ally by ancient chroniclers to 'a bathing, which is almost like the 
fire of purgatory before death' - a clear reference to the ascetic 
meaning of combat. 'It is a glory for you never to leave the battle 
| unless] covered with laurels. But it is an even greater glory to 
earn on the batdefield an immortal crown ../ said Saint Bernard 
to the Crusaders, addressing especially the Templars, in his De 
I jwde Sopae Miliiiae? Glorie asolmf attributed to the Lord who is 
;ibt >ve, in the skies — in excehis Deo — was promised to the warrior 
in Provencal texts. 

Moreover, the first military setbacks undergone by the Crusad- 
ers, which were initially a source of surprise and dismay, served 
to purify the notion of war from any residue of materialism 
jind superstitious devotion. The unhappy fate of a crusade was 
compared by the Pope and the clerks to that of an unfortunate 
life, which is judged and rewarded only according to the criteria 
of a non-earthly life and justice. Thus, the Crusaders learned to 
regard something as superior to victory and defeat, and to regard 
all value as residing in the spiritual aspect of action. 

Thus we approach the most inward aspect of heroic 
experience, its ascetic value: it should not cause surprise if, to 
characterise it further, we now turn to the Muslim tradition, which 
might seem to be the opposite pole to the one just discussed. 
The truth is that the races which confronted each other in the 
Crusades were both warlike ones, which experienced in war the 



9 In Praise of the New Knighthood (Piscataway: Gorgias Press> 2010). 
ft Latin: absolute glory'. 




80 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



same supra-material meaning, even while fighting against one 
other. In any case, the ideas which we wish to discuss now are 
essentially to be considered as echoes within die Muslim tradition 
of an originally Persian (Aryo-Iranian) conception, assumed now 
by members of the Arab race. 

In the Muslim tradition, in fact, we find the central nucleus 
of the whole order of ideas dealt with here in the theory of the 
twofold war, that is, of the lesser and greater jihad. The lesser 
war is die material war fought against a hostile people and, in 
particular, against an unjust one, the "barbarians' or 'infidels', in 
which case it becomes the 'lesser jihad ^ identical to the Crusade 
in its outer, fanatical and simply religious sense. The 'greater 
jihad is, in contrast, of the spiritual and interior order: it is the 
fight of man against the enemies which he bears within himself, 
or, more exacdy, the fight of the superhuman element in man 
against everything which is instinctual, passionate and subject 
to natural forces. The condition for inner liberation is that these 
enemies, the 'infidels' and 'barbarians' within us, are pulled down 
and torn to shreds. 

Now; given this background, the essence of die tradition in 
question lies in its conceiving the lesser war, that is, the concrete, 
armed one, as a path through which the 'greater jihad, the inner 
war, can be achieved, in perfect simultaneity. For this reason, in 
Islam, jihad and 'Path of God' are often synonymous. And we 
read in the Qiir'an; 'So let those who sell the life of this world 
for the Next World fight in the Way of Allah. If someone fights 
in the Way of Allah, whether he is killed or is victorious, We will 
pay him an immense reward' (4:74). 7 And again: 'As for those 
who fight in the Way of Allah, He will not let their actions go 
astray. He will guide them and better their condition and He will 
admit them into die Garden which He has made known to them' 
(47:4-6). In these last words there is an allusion to the case of an 
effective death on the batdefield, which, therefore, assumes the 
same meaning which the expression mors trittmphalis, triumphant 



7 The references to the Qur'an and Bhagavad-Cita in this essay are identical to those 
in 'The Greater War and the Lesser War' and l The Metaphysics of War* 



K A< :E AND WAR: THE ARYAN CONCEPTION OF COMBAT 



81 



death, had in classical antiquity- But the same conception can also 
be taken in the symbolic sense in that the one who, whiJe fighting 
i he lesser war', has triumphed in the *gr eaten jihad (by refusing 
lo let himself be overcome by the current of the inferior forces 
an >used in his being by the vicissitudes of war, as happens in the 
heroism a la Remarque or a la Quinton, which we discussed in the 
previous article) has evoked, in any case, a force able, in principle, 
lo overcome the crisis of death. In other words, even without 
having been killed one can have experienced death, can have 
won and can have achieved the culmination peculiar to 'supra- 
life*. From a higher point of view 'Paradise', 'the celestial realm', 
arc, like Valhalla, the Greek 'Isle of Heroes', etc, only symbolic 
figurations, concocted for the masses, figurations which actually 
designate transcendent states of consciousness, beyond life and 
i leath. Ancient Aryan tradition has the vjotdjivanm/tki? 1 to indicate 
i\ realisation of that sort obtained already in the mortal body. 

Let us come now to a pure metaphysical exposition of the 
doctrine in question. We find it in a text originating from the 
ancient Indo-Aryan races, imprinted with a sense of the heroic- 
spiritual reality which it would be hard to match elsewhere. It is 
the Bha!>avad-Giia 7 a part of die epic poem, thtiMahabharata? which 
to an expert eye contains precious material relating not only to 
the spirituality of the Aryan races which migrated to Asia, but 
to diat of the 'Hyperborean' nucleus of these which, according 
to the traditional views to which our conception of race refers, 
must be considered as the origin of them all. 

The Bhaoavad-Gila contains in the shape of a dialogue the doc- 
trine given by the incarnate divinity, Krishna, to a warrior prince, 
Arjuna, who had invoked him, as, overcome by humanitarian and 
sentimentalist scruples, he found himself no longer able to resolve 
to fight the enemv. The judgement of the God is categorical: it 
defines the mercy which had withheld Arjuna from fighting as 

i-'rom the Sanskrit, this term is used in the Advaita Vedanta tradition of Vedic, or 
Hindu* philosophy. 

The Mahabharata, along with the Ramayana, are the two great epic poems of the 
Hindu tradition. It describes the Kurukshetra War, which was an epic struggle 
between two branches of the royal family. 



82 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



'degrading impotence' (2:4) and 'impurities.. .not at all befitting a 
man who knows the value of life. They lead not to higher planets 
but to infamy* (2:2). Therefore, it is not on the basis of earthly and 
contingent necessities but of a divine judgement that the duty of 
combat is confirmed here. The promise is: '(E]ither you will be 
killed on the batdefield and attain the heavenly planets, or you will 
conquer and enjoy die earthly kingdom. Therefore, get up with 
determination and fight' (2:37). The inner guideline, necessary to 
transfigure the 'lesser war' into 'greater, holy war' in death and 
triumphant resurrection, and to make contact, through heroic 
experience, with the transcendental root of one's own being, is 
clearly stated by Krishna: 'Therefore, O Arjuna, surrendering all 
your works unto Me, with full knowledge of Me, without desires 
for profit, with no claims to proprietorship, and free from lethargy, 
fight' (3:30). The terms are just as clear about the fc purity' of heroic 
action, which must be wanted for itself, beyond every contingent 
motivation, every passion and all gross utility The words of the 
text are: 'Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without consider- 
ing happiness or distress, loss or gain, viuory < u* defeat — and by 
so doing you shall never incur sin' (2:38). 

But beyond even this a true metaphysical justification of war 
is arrived at. We will try to express this in the most accessible way. 
The text works on the fundamental distinction between what in 
man exists in the supreme sense and, as such, is incorruptible and 
immutable — spirit — and die corporeal and human clement, which 
has only an illusory existence. Having stressed the metaphysical 
non-reality of what one can lose or make another lose in the 
vicissitudes of combat, as ephemeral Life and mortal body (there 
is nodiing painful and tragic — it is said — in the fact diat what 
is fatally destined to fall, falls), diat aspect of the divine which 
appears as an absolute and sweeping force is recalled. Before the 
greatness of this force (which flashes through Arjuna's mind 
in the moment of a supernatural vision), every created, that is, 
conditioned, existence appears as a 'negation'. It can therefore be 
said that such a force strikes as a terrible revelation wherever such 
'negation' is actively denied; that is to say, in more concrete and 



R A CE AND WAR: THE ARYAN CONCEPTION OF COMBAT 83 

intelligible terms, wherever a sudden outburst sweeps up every 
finite life, every limitation of the petty individual, either to destroy 
trim, or to revive him. Moreover, the secret of the 'becoming', of 
I he fundamental resdessness and perpetual change which charac- 
terises life here below, is deduced precisely from the situation of 
beings, finite in themselves, which also participate in something 
infinite. The beings which would be described as 'created' by 
Christian terminology, are described rather, according to ancient 
Aryan tradition, as 'conditioned 5 , subject to becoming, change 
and disappearance, precisely because, in them, a power burns 
which transcends them, which wants something infinitely vaster 
ihan all that they can ever want. Once the text in various ways 
has given the sense of such a vision of life it goes on to specify 
what fighting and heroic experience must mean for the warrior. 
Values change: a higher life manifests itself through death; and 
lestruction, for the one who overcomes it, is a liberation - it is 
►rccisely in its most frightening aspects that the heroic outburst 
appears as a sort of manifestation of the divine in its capacity of 
metaphysical force of destruction of the finite - in the jargon of 
s< >me modern philosophers this would be called 'the negation of 
the negation'. The warrior who smashes 'degarding impotence', 
who faces the vicissitudes of heroism 'v\ith your mind absorbed in 
(he supreme spirit', seizing upon a plan according to which both the 
T and the 'thou', and therefore both fear for oneself and mercy 
for others, lose all meaning, can be said to assume actively the 
absolute divine force, to transfigure himself within it, and to free 
himself by breaking through the limitations relating to the mere 
human state of existence. 'Life - like a bow; the mind - like the 
arrow; the target to pierce - the supreme spirit; to join mind to 
spirit as the shot arrow hits its target.' - These are the evocative 
expressions contained in another text of the same tradition, the 
MarkandeyaPttratm. Such, in short, is the metaphysical justification 
of war, the sacred interpretation of heroism, the transformation 
of the 'lesser war' into the 'greater holy war', according to the 
ancient Indo-Aryan tradition which gives us dierefore, in the most 



HA 



METAPHYSICS OF WAK 



complete and direct form, the intimate content present also in 
the other formulations pointed out. 

In conclusion, let us mention two more points. 
The first concerns the meaningful relation, in the hhagavad 
( i/'/a, between the teaching which has just been described on the 
one hand and tradition and race on the other. In 4:1-3, it is said 
that this is the 'solar' wisdom received from Mann, who, as is well 
known, is the most ancient 'divine' legislator of the Aryan race. 
His laws, for Aryans, have the same value that the Talmndh^ for 
Hebrews: that is to say, they constitute the formative force of 
their way of life, the essence of their 'race of the spirit'. Now, 
this primordial wisdom, which was at first transmitted through 
direct succession, 'in course of time the succession was broken, 
and therefore die science as it is appears to be lost 5 (4:2). It was 
not to a priest, but to a warrior prince, Arjuna, that it was revealed 
again in the way just recounted. To realise this wisdom by fol- 
lowing the path of sacred heroism and absolute action can only 
mean, therefore, restoration, awakening, resumption of what was 
at the origin of tradition, which has survived for centuries in die 
dark depths of the race and routinised itself in the customs of 
successive ages. The meaning that we have already indicated, the 
re-galvanising effect which the fact of war in given conditions 
can have for the 'race of the spirit', is thus exactly confirmed. 

Secondly, it can be noticed that one of the main causes of the 
crisis of Western civilisation lies in a paralysing dilemma, con- 
stituted, on die one hand, by a weak, abstract, or conventionally 
devotional spirituality, rich in moralistic and humanitarian implica- 
tions; and, on the other hand, by a paroxysmal development of 
action of all sorts, but in a materialistic and nearly barbaric sense. 
This situation has remote causes. Psychology teaches us that, in 
the subconscious, inhibition often transforms energies repressed 
and rejected into causes of disease and hysteria. The ancient tra- 
ditions of the Aryan races were essentially characterised by the 
ideal of action: they were paralysed and partially suffocated by 
the advent of Christianity, which, in its original forms, and not 
without relation to elements derived from non-Aryan races, shifted 



M M I \ MP WAR: THE ARYAN CONCEPTION OF COMBAT 85 

|hi i mphasis of spirituality from the domain of action to that of 
irrjtiK mplation, devotion and monastic asceticism. Catholicism, 
it i n ue, often tried to rebuild the smashed bridge - and here, 
in ih « ussing the spirit of the Crusades, we have already seen an 
. it n iplc * >f this attempt. However, the antithesis between passive 
tpuiiualirv" and un-spiritual activity has continued to weigh on the 
kit ii mies of Western man and recendy it has taken the form of 
. paroxysmal development of all sorts of action in the already 
[Rltd sense of action on the material plane, which, even when it 
Ii .ids to realisations of unquestionable greatness, is deprived of 
. <tv transcendent point of reference. 

Given these conditions the advantages of the resumption 
of a tradition of action which is once again charged with spirit 
adapted, naturally, to the times - justified not only by the 
immediate necessities of a particular historical situation, but 
bj a transcendent vocation - should be clear to all. If beyond 
I he iv-integration and defence of the race of the body we must 
proceed to the rediscovery of values able to purify the race of 
I he spirit of Aryan humanity from every heterogeneous element, 
|nd to lead to its steady development, we think that a new, living 
understanding of teachings and of ideals such as those briefly 
(recalled here is a fitting task for us to undertake. 



Soul and Race of War 



In the previous articles in this series we have spoken about the 
varieties of heroic experience and described its possible forms 
from the point of view of race and spirit. We here resume the 
argument and discuss in more detail the heroism and sense of the 
meaning of combat which we need to grasp as ideals in relation 
to our higher race and our higher tradition. 

We have already been obliged to observe that, today, 'heroism' 
is often spoken of in a vague and unspecified sense. If by hero- 
ism what is meant is simply impulsiveness, contempt for danger, 
audacity and indifference towards one's own life there is in this a 
sort of common denominator which can put on the same level the 
savage, the gangster and the crusading knight. From the material 
point of view this generic heroism might be sufficient for many 
contingencies, especially in the context of mere human herds. 
From a higher point of view, however, we must enquire further 
into the question of what heroes are, and what is the meaning 
which leads and determines individual heroic experience. 

For this problem various elements should be borne in mind, 
and above all those relating to the general type of civilisation, to 
race and, in a way, to caste as a further differentiation of race. 
Things can be clarified best if, as a starting point, we recall the 
general outline of ancient Aryan social hierarchy as it is most 



1 Originally published on 5-20 September 1940 as 'Anuria e razza della guerra ' in La 
Difesa della Razza. 

86 



>UL AND RACE OF WAR 



87 



I learly exhibited in the Indo- Aryan civilisation, as well as in the 
Nordic-Romanic Medieval civilisation. This hierarchy was quadri- 
partite. At the top were the exponents of spiritual authority - we 
I ould say, generalising, the spiritual leaders to whom the warrior 
nobles were subject. Then came the bourgeoisie (the Third 
I 'state') 2 and, in the fourth place, the caste or class of the simple 
workers - today we would call them the proletariat Evidently, 
(his was not so much a hierarchy of men as one of functions, in 
which, though each function had its own dignity, the functions 
could not help but exist normally in the relations of subordination 
which have just been pointed out. It is quite clear, in fact, that 
ihcse relations correspond exactly to those which exist between 
the various faculties of every man worthy of the name: the mind 
directs the will, which, in its turn, dominates the functions of the 
organic economy - to which, finally, the purely vital forces of the 
body are subordinated. 

This outline is very useful, if only because it allows us to dis- 
tinguish general types of civilisation, and to grasp the sense of 
their succession, or their alternation, in history. Thus we have four 
general types of civilisation, distinguished according to whether 
they are guided supremely by the truths, values and ideals of 
die spiritual leaders, the warriors, the bourgeoisie or the slaves. 
Leaving aside the Middle Ages, in the quadripartite hierarchy 
as it appeared among the Aryans of the ancient Mediterranean 
world, and still more among those of the Hindu-Iranian civilisa- 
tion, the properly Aryan element was concentrated in the two 
superior castes and determined the values which dominated these 
cultures, while in the two other castes another blood, coming 
from subjugated aboriginal peoples, predominated; this fact could 
lead one to interesting conclusions about the racial background 
involved in the development of the civilisations of each of the 
aforementioned types. 



In pre- revolutionary France, the estates were the various orders which defined the 
stratification of society. The Third Estate was comprised of the poorest elements of 
the populace. 



88 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



Considerations of this nature, however, would offer little 
comfort to an attempt to grasp the general sense of the history 
of die West since it is quite clear that anyone keeping in mind the 
outline here explained would be led to recognise in this history, 
not the much-spoken-of 'evolution', but rather an 'involution' - 
more precisely, successive falls from each of the four hierarchical 
degrees to the next. It is quite clear, in fact, that civilisation of 
the pure heroic-sacral type can only be found in a more or less 
prehistoric period of die Aryan tradition. It was succeeded by 
civilisations at die top of which was the authority no longer of 
spiritual leaders, but of exponents of warrior nobility - and this 
is the age of the historical monarchies up to die period of revolu- 
tions. With the French and American revolutions the Third Estate 
becomes the most important, determining die cycle of bourgeois 
civilisations. Marxism and Bolshevism, finally, seem to lead to the 
final fall, the passage of power and authority to the hands of the 
last of the castes of ancient Aryan hierarchy. 

Now, returning to our main argument, that is, to the typology 
of heroism, it should be noted that the transitions which have 
just been pointed out have not only a political significance, but 
they invest the whole sense of living and lead to the subordina- 
tion of all values to those proper to the dominant caste or race 
of the spirit. Thus, for instance, in the first phase ethics has a 
supernatural justification and the supreme value is die conquest 
of immortality; in the second phase - that is, in the civilisation 
of warrior nobility - ethics is already 'secular': the ethics of 
fidelity, honour and loyalty. Bourgeois ethics follow this with 
die ideal of economic well-being, of prosperity and capitalist 
adventure. In the last phase the only ethics are those of materi- 
alised, collectivised and deconsecrated work as supreme value. 
Analogous transformations can be found in all fields - take for 
example architecture: as central architectonic type the temple 
is followed by the casde, then by the city of the commune, and 
finally by the rationalised hive-house of modern capitals. Another 
example would be the family: from a unit of the heroic-sacral 
type, which it was in the first phase, it passes to the type of the 



M HJ L AND RACE OF WAR 



89 



Vnrrior' family, centred in the firm authority of the father; then 
folic >ws the family as bourgeois unity on an exclusively economic- 
rniimentai basis; and, in the last phase, there is the communist 
<h .integration of the family. 

Precisely die same articulations can be noticed in the types 
» I heroic experience and in the meaning of war and combat in 
Scnetal. We do not need to dwell on the conception of war and 
In roism peculiar to the civilisations of the first type, or even to 
he original Aryans, because we have already referred repeatedly 
md at length to their traditions in previous articles. Here we will 

hit ourselves to saying that war and heroism in this first phase 
i ii n be viewed essentially as forms of 'asceticism', as paths alon 
which those same supernatural and immortality-granting fruits 
l nn be picked which are promised by initiation, or by asceticism 
of the religious and contemplative type. But in the second phase 

in the civilisation of the 'warriors' - the perspective has already 
shifted; the 'sacred* content of heroic experience and the con- 
cept of war almost as symbol and glimmer of an ascending and 
metaphysical struggle is veiled; what is above all important now 
is fighting and waging war on behalf of one's race, his honour 
and his glory. With die advent of 'bourgeois' civilisations the type 
t »f ihe warrior gives way to that of the soldier and the national- 
territorial aspect which, only a Utde before, was not pronounced, 
but is emphasised: we are in the presence of die dtoje/P who takes 
up arms, of the pathos of war and heroism 'for freedom', that is, 
more or less, for the cause of the 'immortal principle' of 'strug- 
gle against tyranny' - the jargon equivalent of the political-social 
forms of the previous civilisation of the warriors. It is with such 
'myths' that the 1914-1918 World War has been supported, in 
which the Allies stated quite baldly that it represented for them 
the 'crusade of democracy', the new leap forward of the 'great 
revolution' for the cause of the freedom of the peoples against 
'imperialism' and the residual forms of 'Medieval obscurantism'- 
In the first forms of the final phase, that is, of the 'civilisation of 
the slaves', the concept of war is transformed; it internationali 5C 



3 French: 'citizen' 



90 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



ii: sell and collecti vises itself, tending towards the concept of the 
world wide revolution of the proletariat. It is only in the service 
< >f l his revolution that war is legitimate, that dying is noble and 
l hm ihe hero must arise from the worker. These are the funda- 
mental meanings to which the heroic experience can conform, 
lowing aside its immediate and subjective aspect of impulse and 
boldness which lead beyond themselves. 

In talking of the penultimate phase, that is, 'bourgeois war', 
\\v haw deliberately spoken of 'myths'. Bourgeois nature has 
i wo main aspects: sentimentalism and economic interest. If the 
ideology of 'freedom', and 'nation' democratically conceived, 
corresponds to the first aspect, the second has no less weight in 
the unconfessed motives of 'bourgeois war'. The 1914-1918 war 
hows clearly, in fact, that the 'noble' democratic ideology was only 
-a covtt, while the part which international finance really played 
ts m >w well-known. And today, in the new war, this appears even 
more clearly: the sentimental pretexts offered have proved to be 
more and more inconsistent, and it is obvious, on the contrary, 
l bat material and plutocratic interests, and the desire to maintain 
a monopoly upon the raw materials of the world, as well as upon 
gold, are what have set the 'tone' of the fight of the democratic 
Allies and have led them to take up arms and ask millions of men 
n i sacrifice their lives. 

This allows us also to remark upon the racial factor. We should 
not confuse what a caste or a class is when it is a subordinate 
parr in a hierarchy which conforms to given values with what it 
I >ec< >mes when it seizes power and subordinates everything to 
itself. Thus, the bourgeoisie and the proletariat of the modern 
world have characters very different from those which were 
Characteristic of the corresponding classes in traditional Aryan 
i ivUisations. The desecrated and dark character of the former is 
as marked as were the sacred and spiritual superior values which, 
I »v means of participation, were reflected in the most humble and 
material forms of human activity of the latter. Every usurpation 
has a degradation as its fatal consequence: diis process almost 
always presupposes the infiltration of socially and racially inferior 



'.OUL AND RACE OF WAR 



91 



elements. In the case of the Western bourgeoisie these elements 
have been supplied by Hebraism. Let us not delude ourselves: the 
i vpc of the plutocrats and of the capitalists, the three kings of 
bourgeois and democratic civilisation, is essentially a Jewish type, 
even when precise physical descent from the Jewish race cannot 
be demonstrated. With respect to America, everyone knows the 
considerations which led Sombart 4 to call capitalism the quintes- 
sence of the doctrine of Moses. It is well-known that, in the final 
phase of the normal society of the West which was the Ghibel- 
line Middle Ages, international trade and commerce using gold 
were to a large extent Jewish prerogatives, and that, even in the 
'bourgeois professions' of the Third Estate of diat time, wherever 
l hey remained in the hands of Aryans, before the emancipation 
and degeneration of the civilisation of the Communes, features 
of great dignity and probity were maintained which can hardly be 
found in the modern civilisation of die merchants, i.e., the bour- 
geois capitalist civilisation. It is essentially from the Jewish element 
that this civilisation has drawn its 'style'. And, given these facts, it 
is obvious that, by means of elective affinities, this civilisation had 
to be completely opened to Hebraism, which has scaled its main 
positions of responsibility with ease, and has taken over control 
of all its powers by means of its own specialised racial qualities. 
Thus, it can well be said that the current war is one of mer- 
chants and Jews, who have mobilised the armed forces and the 
heroic possibilities of democratic nations to defend their interests. 
Certainly, there are other contributory factors. But it is unques- 
tionable that England is a typical case of diis phenomenon, 
which is hardly new, and, to tell the truth, exhibits a characteristic 
phenomenon of inversion. To be specific, in England monarchy 
and nobility still exist and, until yesterday, a military class with an 
unquestionable heritage of character, sang-froid and contempt for 
danger existed also. But it is not in such elements that the centre 
of the British Empire lies, but rather in die Jew and the Judaised 
Aryan. The degenerate remains of a 'civilisation of warriors 5 serve 



4 Werner Sombart (1863-1941), a German economist, and the author of The Jews 
and Modern Capitalism (London: T. I-. Unwin, 191 3)- 



92 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



a 'civilisation of merchants', which - normally - would rather 
have had to serve them. Only those who have a precise sense of 
this can grasp the dark and confused forces at work in the race 
of those whom Italy fights today: and it is precisely the character 
of these forces which explains the decline of English fighting 
ability, and the impossibility of true heroism and true boldness 
because by now even the 'mythic* premises of the 1914-1918 war 
are lacking, as has been pointed out just above. 

Let us come now to our final point, which is the clarification 
of the sense of our war and our heroism on the basis of die 
genera] doctrinal and historical views we have expressed. At the 
risk of being taken for hopeless Utopians we will never grow 
tired of repeating that our taking up once more of the Aryan and 
Roman symbols must lead to the taking up once more, also, of 
the spiritual and traditional conceptions which were peculiar to 
the original civilisations which developed under those symbols. 

We have spoken of die superior Aryan conception of war 
and heroism as asceticism, catharsis, overcoming of the tie of 
the human T and, ultimately, effective participation in immor- 
tality. Now let us emphasise that the inferior is comprised in the 
superior - meaning, in our case, that the experience of combat 
according to this superior meaning must not be understood as 
a sort of confused mystical impulsiveness, but as the develop- 
ment, integration and transfiguration of everything which can be 
experienced in war, or which can be asked of war, from any of 
the subordinate and conditioned standpoints. Proceeding from 
what is below to what is above, it can therefore be said that an 
unavoidable need for social justice in the international arena and 
a revolt against the hegemony of nations incarnating the 'civilisa- 
tion of the merchants' may be the immediate determinant of the 
war. But the one who fights the war on such grounds can find in 
it also the occasion to realise, simultaneously, a higher experience, 
that is, fighting and being a hero not so much as soldier but as 
warrior, as a man who fights and loves to fight not so much in 
the interest of material conquests as in the name of his King and 
of his tradition. And beyond this stage, in a successive phase, or 



SOUL AND RACE OF WAR 



93 



a higher class, this same war can become a means to achieve war 
in the supreme sense, as asceticism and 'path of God', as culmi- 
nation of that general meaning of living, of which it was said: 
vita est militia super terram. All this becomes integrated and - it can 
be added - there is no doubt that the impulse and the ability to 
sacrifice are superior by far in the one who realises this supreme 
meaning in war, as compared one who stops at one of the sub- 
ordinate meanings. And even on this mundane plane the law of 
the eardi can meet with the law of God when the most tragic 
demands which can be made in the name of the greatness of a 
nation are fulfilled in an action whose ultimate sense is, however, 
the overcoming of the human tie, contempt for the petty existence 
of the 'plains', the tension which, in the supreme culminations of 
life, means choosing something which is more than life. 

If this is the idea of the 'holy war' as simultaneously material 
and spiritual struggle which was peculiar to the Aryan peoples, 
a further, specific reference to Aryan Romanity is opportune to 
avoid some 'romantic' distortions to which that idea has been 
subjected in a later period in some stocks of that people, above 
all Nordic ones. We mean to allude to so-called 'tragic heroism*, 
the love of combat for its own sake, which among Nordic peo- 
ples takes on overtones of the Titanic, the 'Nibelungian' 5 and 
the Faustian. To the extent that this is not just literature - and 
bad literature - it contains glints of Aryan spirituality, certainly, 
but they have degenerated to the level appropriate to a simple 
civilisation of warriors since they have not been able to remain 
on the superior level of the origins, which is not merely heroic, 
but also 'solar' and 'Olympian'. The Roman conception does n< »t 
know this distortion. Inwardly, as outwardly, war cannot be the last 
word; it is rather die means to conquest of a power as calm as it is 
perfect and intangible. Beyond the mysticism of war, in die higher- 
Aryan conception as well as in the Roman one, is the rmsticism 



5 Nibelungen is the name of the Burgundian royal family in Germanic mythology. 



94 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



of victory. The soldiers of Fabius 6 did not romantically swear to 
win or to die, but rather to return as victors - as they indeed did. 
Tn the Roman ceremony of the triumph, which, as we said in 
another article, had a more religious than military character, die 
personality of the victor was in the closest relation with Jupiter, 
the Aryan god of cosmic order and law. The authentic idea of 
PaxRomanc? had distincdy 'Olympian' characteristics— to realise 
this all one needs to do is to refer to the writers of the age of 
Augustus 8 and to Virgil 9 above all. It is not the cessation of the 
spiritual tension of war, but its fecund and luminous culmination 
— as such, it represents die overcoming of war as an cnd-in-itself 
and obscurely tragic vocation. 

These are the fundamental characteristic elements of the 
highest Aryan conception of combat. The importance of recalling 
them and experiencing diem again today cannot be doubted by 
anyone who is aware that the current conflict is not merely an 
almost 'private' affair between certain nations, but is destined, by 
destroying confused and violently established situations, to lead to 
a new general order, truly worthy of die name: spiritually Roman. 



8 



Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus (280 BC?-203 BC) was a Roman consul who 
was appointed dictator of the Roman Republic after its initial defeat during the 
Second Punic War, in which Rome was invaded by the Carthaginians under Han- 
nibal's command. Fabius managed to keep the stronger Carthaginian force at bay 
by engaging in a protracted guerilla war against J hem, rather than by confronting 
them direcily, which he knew would lead to defeat. For his victorious service, the 
Romans hailed Fabius as 'The Shield of Rome'. 

'The Roman Peace* this was a period of the history of the Roman Empire, lasting 
roughly from 27 BC to 180 AD, during which the Empire prospered and fought no 
major wars. 

Augustus (63 BC-14 AD) was the first Emperor of the Roman Empire who initi- 
ated the Pax Romana. 

Virgil (70-19 BC) was a Roman poet who authored the Aeneid, which was the 
national epic of Classical Rome. 



The Aryan Doctrine of 
Combat and Victory 1 



The decline of the modern West, according to the view of a 
famous critic of civilisation, 2 clearly possesses two salient 
characteristics: in the first place the pathological development 
of activity for its own sake; in the second place contempt for the 
values of knowledge and contemplation. 

By knowledge this critic does not mean rationalism, intel- 
lectualism or the vain games of men of letters - nor by 
contemplation does he mean cutting oneself off from the 
world, renunciation or a misunderstood form of monastic 
detachment Knowledge and contemplation represent for him, 
rather, the most normal and appropriate forms of participation 
of man in supernatural, superhuman and supra-rational reality. 
Notwithstanding this clarification, his view involves what is, 
to us, an unacceptable presupposition. In fact, he has already 
tacitly implied that every act in the material domain is limiting 
and that the highest spiritual sphere is accessible only in ways 
different from those of action. 



1 Originally published as Die arische Lehre von Kampf urid Sieg (Vienna: Anton 
Schroll 8c Co., 1941), comprising the text of the address given by Evola in German 
at the Abteilung fur Kulturwissenschaft des Kaisers Wilhelm-Instituts conference, 
at the Palazzo Zuccari in Rome on 7 December 1940. 

2 The critic referred to is probably Rene Gu£non. 

95 



96 



METAP! I YSICS OF WAR 



In this premise the influence of a vision ol life is clearly 
recognisable which, in its essence, remains strange to the spirit 
of the Aryan race, even if it is so embedded in die thought of 
the Christianised West that it can even be found revived in the 
imperial conception of Dante. 3 The opposition between action 
and contemplation, however, was unknown t( » i he ancient Aryans. 
Action and contemplation were not regarded as Hie two terms of 
an opposition. They designated merely two distinct paths to the 
same spiritual realisation. In other words, it was thought that man 
could overcome the conditioning of individuality and participate 
in the supernatural reality by means of contemplation or, equally, 
by means of action. 

Starting from this conception we must therefore evaluate the 
character of the decline of Western civilisation in a different way. 
The tradition of action is in the nature of the Aryan-Western 
races. This tradition has, however, undergone a progressive devia- 
tion. The modern West has thus come to know and honour only a 
secularised and materialised form of action, devoid of any point 
of contact with transcendence — a desecrated activity, which has 
necessarily degenerated fatally into fever and mania and become 
action for the sake of action, merely producing simple mechani- 
cal effects conditioned by time. In the modern world ascetic and 
authentically contemplative values cannot be drawn into corre- 
spondence with such degenerate action either, but only a confused 
culture and a lifeless and conventional faith. This is the point of 
reference for our analysis of the situation. 

If the watchword for any current movement of renewal is 
'return to the origins' then recovering awareness of the ancient 
Aryan conception of action must be considered an essential task. 
This conception must operate with transformative effectiveness, 
evoking vital forces in the new man, aware of his race. Today, we 
ourselves propose to attempt a general survey of die speculative 
universe of the ancient Aryans in order to provide new evidence 

3 Dante Alighiert (1265-1321) is regarded as the greatest writer in the Italian language 
and was the author of The Divine Comedy. Here, Evola is likely referring to Dante's 
work of political philosophy, Monarchy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1996). 



THE ARYAN DOCTRINE OF COMBAT AND VICTORY 



97 



for some fundamental elements of our common tradition, with 
particular relevance to the meaning of combat, war and victory. 



* * * 



For the ancient Aryan war had the general meaning of a perpetual 
fight between metaphysical powers. On the one hand there was 
the Olympian principle of light, the uranic and solar reality; on the 
other hand, brute violence, the titanic- telluric, barbaric element in 
the classical sense, the feminine-dem(>nic substance. The motif of 
this metaphysical fight resurfaces continually through coundess 
forms of myth in all traditions of Aryan origin. Any fight, in the 
material sense* was experienced with greater or lesser awareness 
as an episode in that antithesis. But the Aryan race considered 
itself to be the arm}- of the Olympian principle: accordingly, it 
is necessary to restore this conception among Aryans, as being 
the justification, or the highest consecration, of any hegemonic 
aspiration, but also of the very idea of empire, whose anti-secular 
character is basically very obvious. 

To the traditionally based world view; all apparent realities are 
symbolic. This is therefore true of war as well, as is seen from the 
subjective and interior point of view: War and the Path of God 
are thus merged into a single entity. 

The significant testimonies found within the Nordic-German 
traditions regarding diis are well-known. It is necessary to note, 
however, that these traditions, in the terms in which they have 
reached us, have become fragmented and jumbled up, or constitute 
materialistic residues c >f higher, primordial Aryan traditions, often 
decayed to the level of popular superstitions. This consideration 
does not prevent us from establishing some essential motifs. 

First of all, as is well-known, Valhalla is the centre of celestial 
immortality, reserved mainly for heroes fallen on the battlefield. 
The lord of this place, Odin-Wotan, is presented to us in the 
Ynglingasaga as having shown to the heroes the path which leads 
to the place of die gods, where immortal life flourishes. Accord- 
ing to this tradition no sacrifice or cult is more appreciated by the 



98 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



supreme god, and none produces richer fruits, than that sacrifice 
which one offers as one falls fighting on the battlefield. In addi- 
tion to this, behind the confused popular representation of the 
Wildes Heei* this meaning is hidden: through the warriors who, 
falling, offer a sacrifice to Odin the power is increased which this 
god needs for the ultimate battle against the Ragna-rokkr, that is, 
the 'darkening of the divine', which has threatened the world 
since ancient times. This illustrates clearly the Aryan motif of 
the metaphysical struggle. In the Edda, it is said that 'no matter 
how great the number of the heroes gathered in Valhalla they 
will never be too many for when the Wolf comes'. The 'Wolf 
here is the symbol of dark and wild powers which the world of 
the Aesir had managed to chain and subdue. 

The Aryolranian conception of Mithra, the 'sleepless war- 
rior 5 , who at the head of the Fravashi of his faithful wages battle 
against the enemies of the Aryan God of Light is completely 
analogous. We will soon deal with the Fravashi and their corre- 
spondence with the Valkyries of the Nordic tradition. For now, 
we would like to explain the general meaning of the c holy war 5 
by means of other, concordant testimonies. 

It should not cause surprise if we refer in the first place to the 
Muslim tradition. Here, the Muslim tradition serves as transmitter 
of die Aryo-Iranian tradition. The idea of 'holy war' - at least 
as far as the elements that we are considering are concerned - 
reached the Arabian tribes via the world of Persian speculation. 
It was, therefore, a late rebirth of a primordial Aryan heritage, 
and seen from this perspective we can certainly adopt it. 

Having said that, in the tradition in question two 'holy wars' 
are distinguished: the 'greater holy war' and the 'lesser holy war'. 
The distinction Is based on a saying of die Prophet, who, when 



4 German: wild host* This is a concept present in many ancient cultures in which a 
group of hunters on horseback can be seen pursuing their prey across the sky. In 
some versions the hunters are believed to be the souls of dead warriors being led 
by the gods. 



THE ARYAN DOCTRINE OF COMBAT AND VICTORY 



99 



he got back from a military expedition, said, 'I return now from 
the lesser to the greater war 5 . 5 

In this respect the greater holy war belongs to the spiritual 
order. The lesser holy war, in contrast, is the physical struggle, 
the material war, fought in the outer world. The greater holy war 
is the struggle of man against the enemies he bears in himself. 
More precisely, it is the fight of the supernatural element, innate 
in man, against everything which is instinctual, passionate, cha- 
otic and subject to the forces of nature. This is also die idea that 
reveals itself in a text of the ancient Aryan warrior wisdom, the 
Hhagavad-Gitcr. Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to the 
material senses, mind and intelligence, O mighty-armed Arjuna, 
one should steady the mind by deliberate spiritual intelligence 
and thus - by spiritual strength - conquer this insatiable enemy 
known as lust 5 (3:43). 

The necessary condition for the inner work of liberation is 
that this enemy is destroyed once and for all. In the context of 
a heroic tradition the lesser holy war - that is, external combat 
— serves only as something by means of which the greater holy 
war is achieved. For this reason 'holy war' and 'Path of God 5 are 
often treated as synonymous in the texts. Thus we read in the 
Qur*an\ 'So let those who sell die life of this world for the Next 
World fight in the Way of Allah. If someone fights in the Way 
of Allah, whether he is killed or is victorious, We will pay him an 
immense reward' (4:74). And further: 'As for those who fight in 
the Way of Allah, He will not let their actions go astray. He will 
guide diem and better their condition and He will admit them 
into the Garden which He has made known to them 5 (47:4-6). 

This is an allusion to physical death in war, which corresponds 
perfecdy to the so-called mors tmimphalis— 'triumphant death 5 — of 
the Classical traditions. However, the same doctrine can also be 
interpreted in a symbolic sense. The one who, in the 'lesser holy 
war', has been able to live a 'greater holy war* has created within 
himself a force which puts him in a position to overcome the 



5 All references to Islamic scripture* and the Bhagavad-Gito in this essay are identical 
to those contained in 'The Greater War and the Lesser War* and 'Metaphysics of War'. 



100 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



crisis of death. Even without getting killed physically, through 
the asceticism of action and combat, one can experience deadi, 
one can win inwardly and realise 'mote-than-life'. In the esoteric 
respect, as a matter of fact, 'paradise', 'the celestial realm' and 
analogous expressions are nothing but symbolic representations 
- concocted for the people - of transcendent states of conscious- 
ness on a higher plane than life and death. 

These considerations should allow us to discern the same 
contents and meanings, under the outer garment of Christianity, 
which the Nordic-Western heroic tradition was forced to wear 
during the Crusades in order to be able to manifest itself in the 
external world. In die ideology of the Crusade the liberation of 
the Temple and the conquest of the 'i loly Land' had points of 
contact - much more numerous than one is generally inclined 
to believe - with the Nordic-Aryan tradition, which refers to 
die mystical Asgard, the remote land <»J the Aesir and heroes, 
where death does not reign and the inhabitants enjoy immortal 
life and supernatural peace. Holy war appeared as an integrally 
spiritual war, so much so that it could be compared literally by 
preachers to *a bathing which is almost like the fire of purgatory, 
but before death'. 

Saint Bernard declared to the Templars, f 1 1 is a glory for you 
never to leave the batde [unless] covered with laurels. But it is an 
even greater glory to earn on the battlefield an immortal crown ...' 

The 'absolute glory' - attributed to the Lord who is above, 
in die skies - in excelsis Deo (i - is ordained also for the Crusader. 
Against this background Jerusalem, the coveted goal of die 'lesser 
holy war', could be seen in the twofold aspect of terrestrial city 
and celestial city and the Crusade proved to be the prelude to a 
true fulfilment of immortality. 

The oscillating military vicissitudes of the Crusades provoked 
bafflement, initial confusion and even a wavering of faith. But 
later their sole effect was to purify the idea of holy war from 
every residue of materiality. The ill-fated outcome of a Crusade 
came to be compared to virtue persecuted by misfortune, a virtue 



6 Lai in: f God in the highest' 



THE ARYAN DOCTRINE OF COMBAT AND VICTORY 



101 



whose value can be judged and rewarded only in the light of a 
supra-terrestrial life. Beyond victory or defeat the judgement of 
value focused on the spiritual dimension of action. Thus, the holy 
war was worthwhile for its own sake, irrespective of its visible 
results, as a means to reach a supra-personal realisation through 
the active sacrifice of the human element. 

The same teaching appears, elevated to a metaphysical plane 
of expression, in a famous Hindu-Aryan text — the Bhagavad-Gita. 
The humanitarian compassion and the emotions which hold the 
warrior Arjuna back from fighting against the enemy are charac- 
terised by the god as 'impurities... not at all befitting a man who 
knows the value of life. They lead not to higher planets but to 
infamy' (2:2). 

Instead the god promises the following: '[EJither you will be 
killed on the batdefield and attain the heavenly planets, or you 
wall conquer and enjoy the earthly kingdom. Therefore, get up 
with determination and fight 5 (2:37). 

The inner disposition to transmute the lesser holy war into the 
greater holy war is clearly described in the following terms: 'Thus 
knowing oneself to be transcendental to the material senses, mind 
and intelligence, O mighty-armed Arjuna, one should steady the 
mind by deliberate spiritual intelligence and thus — by spiritual 
strength - conquer this insatiable enemy known as lust' (3:43). 

Equally clear expressions assert the purity of this action: it 
must be wanted for itself, beyond every material aim, beyond 
every passion and every human impulse: c Do thou fight for the 
sake of fighting, without considering happiness or distress, loss 
or gain, victory or defeat — and by so doing you shall never incur 
sin' (2:38). 

As a further metaphysical foundation the god enlightens his 
listener on the difference between absolute spirit, which is inde- 
structible, and the corporeal and human elements, which possess 
only illusory existence. On die one hand Arjuna becomes aware 
of die metaphysical unreality of what one can lose or cause others 
to lose, i.e., the ephemeral life and the mortal body. On the other 
hand Arjuna is led to experience the manifestation of the divine 



102 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



as a power which sweeps the one who experiences it away into 
irresistible absoluteness. Compared to this force any conditioned 
form of existence appears as a mere negation. When this nega- 
tion is itself continuously and actively negated, that is, when every 
limited form of existence is overwhelmed or destroyed in combat, 
this force becomes terrifyingly evident. It is in these terms that 
the energy suitable to provoke the heroic transformation of the 
individual can be properly defined. To the extent that he is able 
to act in the purity and absoluteness which we have indicated 
the warrior breaks the chains of the human, evokes the divine as 
metaphysical force of destruction of the finite, and attracts this 
force effectively into himself, finding in it his illumination and 
liberation. The evocative watchword of another text, belonging 
to the same tradition, is appropriate here: 'Life - like a bow; the 
mind - like the arrow; the target to pierce - the supreme spirit; 
to join mind to spirit as the shot arrow hits its target/ 

It is highly significant that the hhagavad-Gita presents these 
teachings, which explain how the higher form of die metaphysi- 
cal realisation of combat and heroism should be understood as 
referring to a primordial Aryan heritage of a solar nature. These 
teachings were in fact given by The Sun' to the primordial leg- 
islator of the Aryans, Manu, and subsequently maintained by a 
sacred dynasty of kings. In the course of centuries they came to 
be lost and were therefore newly revealed by the divinity, not to 
a priest, but ro a representative of the warrior nobility, Arjuna. 



?ht* ^n ^F 



What we have discussed so far allows us to understand also 
the intimate content of another group of classical and Nordic 
traditions. We must start with a simple observation: in these 
traditions, certain specific symbolic images appear exceptionally 
often: diat of die soul as demon, double, genius and the like; 
those of the Dionysian 7 entities and the goddess of death; and, 



Dionysus was the Greek god of ecstasy and intoxication. 



I HE ARYAN DOCTRINE OF COMBAT AND VICTORY 



103 



finally, that of a goddess of victory, who often appears also as 
goddess of batde. 

To understand these we should first clarify the meaning of 
the image of the soul as demon, genius or double. The man of 
< lassical Antiquity symbolised in the demon or double a deep 
force, which is the life of life, so to speak, insofar as it rules over 
all the corporeal and animic events which ordinary conscious- 
ness does not reach, but which, however, are determinative of 
the contingent existence and destiny of the individual. A close 
relationship was believed to exist between diis entity and the 
mystical powers of race and blood. The demon seems in many 
aspects to be similar to the lares, the mystical entities of a stock 
or of a progeny, of which Macrobius, 8 for example, asserts: The 
gods are those who keep us alive - they feed our body and guide 
our soul.' It can be said that there is a relationship between the 
demon and ordinary consciousness analogous to that which exists 
between the individuating principle and the individuated princi- 
ple. The former is, according to the teaching of the ancients, a 
supra-individual force, superior, therefore, to birth and death. The 
latter, i.e., individuated consciousness, conditioned by the body 
and the outer world, is destined as a rule to dissolution or to an 
ephemeral and indistinct survival. In the Nordic tradition, the 
image of the Valkyrie has more or less the same meaning as that 
of the demon in Classical Antiquity. In many texts the image of 
the Valkyrie merges with that of thejylgfa* that is, a spiriaial entity 
at work in man, to whose power the destiny of man is subject 
And as kynfylgja the Valkyrie is - like the lares of ancient Rome - 
the mystical power of the blood. The same thing applies to the 
Fravashi of the Aryo-Iranian tradition. The Fravashi, a famous 
Orientalist explains, 4 is the intimate power of any human being, 
it is what keeps him alive and sees to it that he is born and exists'. 
At the same time the Fravashi are, like Roman lares, related 
to the primordial powers of a stock, and are, like the Valkyries, 
terrifying goddesses of war, dispensers of fortune and victory. 



8 Ambrosius Theodosius Macrobius (395-423), a Roman Neoplatonist philosopher. 
His primary work is the Saturnalia (New York: Columbia University Press, 1969). 



104 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



This is the first connection we wish to examine. This mysteri- 
ous power, which is the deep soul of the race and the transcendent 
factor at work in the individual, what can it have in common with 
the goddess of war? To understand this point correctly, it is neces- 
sary to remember that ancient Indo-Europeans had, so to speak, 
an aristocratic and differentiated conception of immortality. Not 
all escape the dissolution of the T into that lemuric residuum of 
which Hades and Niflheim 9 were ancient symbolic representa- 
tions. Immortality is the privilege of the few, and, according to the 
Aryan conception, specifically the privilege of heroes. Continuing 
to live — not as a shadow, but as a demigod — is reserved to those 
which a special spiritual action has elevated from the one nature 
to the other. Here, we unfortunately cannot prove in extenso the 
following affirmation: from the operative standpoint this spiritual 
action consisted of the transformation of the individual T from 
the form of ordinary human consciousness, which remains cir- 
cumscribed and individuated, into a deep, supra-individual and 
individuating power, which exists beyond birth and death, a power 
to which we have said the notion of the 'demon' corresponds. 10 

The demon is, however, beyond all the finite forms in which 
it manifests itself, and this not only because it represents the pri- 
mordial power of an entire stock, but also with respect to intensity. 
Consequently, the abrupt passage from ordinary consciousness 
to the power symbolised by the demon causes a destructive crisis, 
a sort of rupture, as a result of the tension of a potential too 
strong for the human circuit. Let us suppose therefore the case 
in which, in completely exceptional conditions, the demon can 
itself, so to speak, burst out in the individual, making him feel its 
destroying transcendence: in this case a sort of living and active 
experience of death would be aroused. The second connection, 
that is, the reason why in the mythical representations of Antiq- 
uity the image of the double or demon has been able to merge 

9 In Norse mythology Niflheim was the location of He], which is where the souls of 
those who die unheroic deaths were sent. 

10 Tor a more precise understanding of the general conception of life in which the 
teachings mentioned here are based, we refer the reader to our Revolt, (Note added 
by Rvola). 



THE ARYAN DOCTRINE OF COMBAT AND VICTORY 



105 



with that of the divinity of death, therefore becomes clear. In 
the Nordic tradition the warrior sees his Valkyrie as he dies or he 
experiences a mortal danger. 

Let us go further. In religious asceticism mortification, the 
renunciation of the T and the impulse to give oneself up to 
God, are the preferred means by which one attempts to cause 
the aforementioned crisis and to overcome it effectively. Expres- 
sions like 'mystical death' or 'dark night of the soul 5 , 11 etc., which 
indicate this condition, are well-known. As opposed to this, in the 
contexr of a heroic tradition the active impulse, the Dionysian 
unleashing of the element of action, is the preferred means to 
the same end. At the lowest degree of the corresponding phe- 
nomenology we observe, for example, dance when employed as a 
sacred technique to evoke and employ, through the ecstasy of the 
soul, forces which reside in its depths. Another life arises within 
the life of the individual when freed by the Dionysian rhythm, 
almost like the emergence of his own abysmal root The Wildes 
Heer, the Furies, 12 the Brynnyes and other analogous spiritual 
natures are symbolic representations of this force. They therefore 
correspond to a manifestation of the demon in its terrifying and 
active transcendence. Sacred games represent a higher level of 
this process. A still higher level is that of war. In this way we are 
led back again to the ancient Aryan conception of combat and 
warrior asceticism. 

The possibility of some such supra-normal experience was 
acknowledged to reside at the peak of danger and of heroic 
combat. The Latin word ktdere (to play, to fight) already seems to 
contain die idea of resolving (Bruckmann) 13 . This is one of the 
many references to the property, innate to combat, of freeing 
one from individual limitation and of bringing to emergence free 
forces which are latent in the depths. The third analogy draws its 



1 1 This is the title of a work by St. John of the Cross. 

12 In Roman mythology, the Furies were female deities who took revenge on the 
living on behalf of dead people who had been wronged. Their name in Greek my- 
thology was the Erynnyes. 

13 Heinz Bruckmann, a German scholar of Latin. 



106 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



origin and foundation from this: the demon, the lares y the individu- 
ating T, etc, are identical not only to the Furies, the Rrynnyes, 
and other unleashed Dionysian natures, which themselves have 
numerous features in common with the goddess of death; they 
correspond also to the virgins who guide the attacker in battle, 
the Valkyries and the Fravashi. The Fravashi, for example, are 
referred to in the texts as "the terrifying, the omnipotent", "those 
who storm and grant victory to the one who invokes them" - or, 
to say it better, to the one who evokes them within himself. 

It is a short step from here to our final analog); The same 
warlike entities assume finally in Aryan traditions the features of 
goddesses of victory, a metamorphosis which marks precisely the 
happy fulfilment of the inner experiences in question. Just like the 
demon or double diey signify a deep and supra-individual power, 
which remains in its latent state during ordinary consciousness; 
just as the Furies and the Erynnyes reflect a special manifesta- 
tion of demonic eruptions and outbursts - and the goddesses of 
death, V?\kynz%fravasbi 9 etc. refer to die same situations, insofar 
as these are made possible by means of heroic combat - so the 
goddess of victory is the expression of the triumph of the T 
over this power. It marks the successful impulsion towards a 
condition situated beyond die danger innate in the ecstasy and 
the sub-personal forms of destruction, a danger always waiting 
in ambush behind the frenetic moment of Dionysian action and 
of heroic action itself What finds expression in this representa- 
tion of mythical consciousness is therefore the impulse towards 
a spiritual, truly supra-personal state, which makes free, immortal, 
inwardly indestructible - which, as it is said, "makes, of the two, 
one" (the two elements of die human essence). 

Let us come now to the overall meaning of these ancient 
heroic traditions, diat is, to the mystical conception of victory. The 
fundamental idea was that there was an effective correspondence 
between the physical and the metaphysical, between the visible 
and the invisible; a correspondence whereby the works of the 
spirit manifested supra-individual features and were expressed 
through real operations and facts. From this presupposition, a 



THE ARYAN DOCTRINE OF COMBAT AND VICTORY 



107 



spiritual realisation was pre-ordained as the secret spirit of cer- 
tain warlike enterprises of which concrete victory would be die 
crown. Accordingly, the material, military dimension of victory 
was regarded as the correlative of a spiritual fact, which brought 
the victory about in accordance with the necessary relationship 
between the interior and exterior worlds. Victory, then, appears 
as the outward and visibk sign of a consecration and a mystical 
rebirth achieved at the same point. The Furies and death, whom 
the warrior has faced materially on the batdefield, contested 
spiritually within him in the form of a threatening eruption of 
the primordial forces of his being. As he triumphs over these, 
vict< *ry is his. 

It thus becomes clear why, in the traditional world, victory 
assumed a sacred meaning. Thus, the chieftain, acclaimed on 
the batdefield, provided a living experience of the presence of a 
mystical power which transfigured him. The deep meaning of the 
other-worldly character bursting out in the glory and the 'divinity' 
of the victor — the fact that, in ancient Rome, the celebration of 
the triumph assumed features much more sacred than military 

— becomes therefore comprehensible. The recurrent symbolism 
in ancient Aryan traditions of victories, Valkyries and analogous 
entities which guide the soul of the warrior to the e sky 5 , is revealed 
to us in a completely different light now, as does the myth of die 
victorious hero, such as the Dorian Hercules, who obtains the 
crown which makes him share in Olympian immortality from 
Nike, the 'goddess of victory 5 . The extent to which the perspec- 
tive which wants to see only 'poetry', rhetoric and fables in all 
this is distorted and superficial becomes clear now. 

Mystical theology teaches that die beatifying spiritual vision 
is achieved in glory, and Christian iconography puts the aureole 
of glory around the heads of saints and of martyrs. All this 
indicates a heritage, albeit faded, of our more elevated heroic 
tradition. The Aryo-Irarxian tradition already knew, in fact, glory 

— hvareno — understood as celestial fire, a glory which comes 
down on kings and chiefs, renders diem immortal and in victory 
testifies for them. And, in classical Antiquity, the radiating royal 



108 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



crown symbolised glory precisely as solar and celestial fire. In the 
Aryan world light, solar splendour, glory, victory, divine royalty 
are images and notions which appear in the tightest conjunction, 
not in the sense of abstractions and inventions of man, but rather 
with the meaning of latent potentialities and absolutely real actu- 
alised capacities. In such context the mystical doctrine of fight 
and victory represents for us a luminous apex of our common 
tradition of action. 



* * sfe 



Today this tradition speaks to us in a way which is still 
comprehensible - provided, of course, that we renounce its outer 
and contingent modalities of manifestation. If we want to go 
beyond an exhausted, battered spirituality, built upon speculative 
abstractions and pietistic feelings, and at die same time to go 
beyond the materialistic degeneration of action, what better points 
of reference can be found today than die aforementioned ideals 
of ancient Aryan man? 

But there is more. In the West spiritual and material tensions 
have become entangled to such a degree in recent years that they 
can only be resolved through combat. With the present war an 
age goes towards its end and forces are gaining ground which can 
no longer be dominated by abstract ideas, universalistic principles 
or myths conceived as mere irrationalities, and which do not in 
themselves provide the basis for a new civilisation. A far deeper 
and far more essential form of action is now necessary so that, 
beyond the ruins of a subverted and condemned world, a new 
age breaks through for Europe* 

In this perspective a lot will depend on the way in which the 
individual of today is able to give shape to die living experience 
of combat: that is, on whether he is in a position to assume hero- 
ism and sacrifice as catharsis, and as a means of liberation and 
of inner awakening. This work of our combatants - inner, invis- 
ible, far from gestures and grandiloquences - will have a decisive 
character not only for the conclusion, victorious and definitive, 



I HE ARYAN DOCTRINE OF COMBAT AND VICTORY 



109 



i »f the events of this stormy period, but also for the configuration 
and the attribution of the sense of the Order which will rise from 
victory. Combat is necessary to awaken and temper that force 
which, beyond onslaughts, blood and danger, will favour a new 
creation with a new splendour and a powerful peace. 

For this reason it is on the batdefield that pure action must be 
learned again today: action not only in the sense of virile asceti- 
cism, but also in the sense of purification and of path towards 
higher forms of life, forms valid in themselves and for themselves 
- this means precisely a return to ancient Aryo- Western tradition. 
From remote times, this evocative watchword still echoes down 
to us: 'Life - like a bow; the mind - like the arrow; the target 
to pierce - the supreme spirit; to join mind to spirit as the shot 
arrow hits its target' 

The one who still experiences combat today, in the sense of 
this acknowledgement of this profession, will remain standing 
while others will collapse - and his will be an invincible force. This 
new man will overcome within himself any drama, any dusk, any 
chaos, forming, with the advent of the new times, the principle 
of a new development. According to the ancient Aryan tradition 
such heroism of the best men can assume a real evocative function, 
that is, it can re-establish the contact, lost for centuries, between 
world and supra- world. Then the meaning of combat will be, not 
horrible slaughter, nor desolate destiny conditioned by the will-to- 
power alone, but a test of the good reason and divine vocation of 
a stock. Then the meaning of peace will not be renewed drowning 
in colourless bourgeois everyday life, nor the lack of the spiritual 
tension found in combat, but the fullness of the tension itself. 

The blood of Heroes is closer to the Lord than the ink of 
scholars and the prayers of the pious/ 

The traditional conception is also based on the presupposition 
that, far more than individuals, the mystical primordial powers of 
the race are at work in 'holy war 5 . These powers of the origins 
are those which create world-wide empires and bring to men 
Victorious peace 9 . 



The Meaning of the Warrior 
Element for the New Europe 1 



One of the main oppositions which the First World War 
brought to light concerns the relationship between the 
state and the military element. What appeared was a characteristic 
antithesis, which in reality reflected not so much two different 
groups of people as two different ages, two mentalities and two 
different conceptions of 'civilisation'. 

On one hand one found the idea that the military and, more 
generally, the warrior element is merely subordinate and instru- 
mental to die state. The normal and correct rulers of the state, 
according to this view, are what one might call the 'civil 5 or 'bour- 
geois' element This 'bourgeois' element engages in professional 
politics and — to use a well-known expression -when politics must 
be continued by other means, 2 the military forces are employed. 
Under these conditions the military element is not expected to 
exercise any particular influence on politics or on the life in society 
in general. It is acknowledged, certainly, that the military element 



Originally published in March 1941 as *Sul signifkato dell'elemento guerriero per 
la nuova Europa' in La Vita Ilaliana. 

'We see, therefore, that War is not merely a political act, but also a real political 
instrument; a continuation of political commerce, a carrying out of the same by 
other means' A famous quotation from Claus von Clausewitz (1780-1831), a Prus- 
sian military theorist. The quotation can be found in his book On War (London: 
Routledge, 2004), p. 42. 

110 



THE MEANING OF THE WARRIOR ELEMENT 



111 



has its own ethics and values. However, this view considers it 
undesirable, and even absurd, to apply these ethics and values to 
the entire normal life of the nation. The view in question is in 
fact closely related to the democratic, illumine* and liberal belief 
that true civilisation does not have anything to do with that sad 
necessity which is war, but that its foundation, rather than the 
warlike virtues, is 'the progress of the arts and sciences' and the 
formation of social life according to the 'immortal principles'. 
That is why, in such a society, one should speak of a 'soldier' 
element rather than a true warrior element. In fact, ctymologi- 
cally the word 'soldier' refers to troops which fight for a salary 
or a fee in the service of a class which does not itself wage war. 
This is, more or less, the meaning which, in spite of obligatory 
conscription, the military element has in liberal and democratic- 
bourgeois States. These States use it to resolve serious disputes 
on the international plane more or less in the same way as, in the 
domestic order, they use the police. 

Over and against this view there is the other according to 
which the military element permeates the political, and also the 
ethical, order. Military values here are authentic warrior values 
and have a fundamental part in the general ideal of an ethical 
formation of life; an ideal valid also, therefore, beyond the strictly 
military plane and periods of war. The result is a limitation of 
the civilian bourgeoisie, politically, and of the bourgeois spirit in 
general in all sectors of social life. True civilisation is conceived 
of here in virile, active and heroic terms: and it is on this basis 
that the elements which define all human greatness, and the real 
rights of the peoples, are understood. 

It hardly needs to be said that, in the 1914-1918 World War, 
the former ideology was proper to the Allies and above all to the 
western and Adantic democracies, while the latter was essentially 
represented by die Central Powers. According to a well-known 
Masonic watchword - which we have often recalled here - that war 



3 French, 'enlightened'. 



112 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



-HE MEANING OF THE WARRIOR ELEMENT 



113 



was fought as a sort of great crusade of worldwide democracy^ 
against 'militarism' and Trussianism', which, to those 'imperialist' 
nations, represented 'obscurantist' residues within 'developed' 
Europe. 

This expression contains, however, the trudi which we pointed 
out at the beginning, namely that the opposition was not only 
between two groups of peoples but also between two ages - even 
though, naturally, at the time and subjectively things appeared in 
a very different manner. What were called in the Masonic jargon 
'anachronistic residues' meant really the survival of values pecu- 
liar to the whole of traditional, warlike, virile and Aryan Europe, 
while the values of the 'developed world' did not mean anything 
but the ethical and spiritual decline of the West. Moreover, we 
know better now what 'imperialists' the hypocritical exponents 
of this latter world were in their own peculiar way: theirs was, to 
be exact, die imperialism of die bourgeoisie and the merchants 
who wanted to enjoy undisturbed the benefits of peace, which 
was to be imposed and preserved, not so much by their own 
military forces as by forces enlisted from all parts of the world 
and paid for this purpose. 

With the peace treaties and the developments of the post-war 
period this has become more and more evident. The function of 
the military element deteriorated into that of a sort of interna- 
tional police force - or, rather than really 'international', a police 
force organised by a certain group of nations to impose, against 
the will of the others and for their own profit, a given actual 
situation: since this was, and is, what 'the defence of peace' and 
'the rights of nations' really mean. The decline of all feelings of 
warrior-like pride and honour was subsequently demonstrated 
by the fact that all sorts of ignoble means were developed to 
secure the desired results without even having to resort to this 
army degraded to the status of international police: systems of 
sanctions, economic blockades, national boycotts, etc. 



With the most recent international developments which have 
led to the loss of authority of the League of Nations and, finally, 
to the current war, an effective reversal of values, not only on 
the political plane but also on the ethical one and in general of 
life-view as a whole, has become clearly visible. The current batde 
is not so much against a particular people but rather against a 
particular idea, which is more or less the same as the one sup- 
ported by the Allies in the previous war. That war was intended 
to consolidate 'democratic imperialism 5 against any dangerous 
troublemakers; the new war is intended to mark the end of this 
'imperialism' and of several myths which serve it as 'alibis', and 
Co create the preconditions for a new age in which warrior ethics 
are to serve as the basis for the civilisation of the collective of 
European peoples. In this sense the present war can be called a 
restorative war. It restores to their original standing the ideals 
and the views of life and right which are central to the original 
traditions of the Aryan peoples - above all the Aryo-Roman 
and Nordic- Aryan ones - so central that, when they decayed or 
were abandoned, this led inevitably to the fall of each of those 
peoples and power passed into the hands of inferior elements, 
both racially and spiritually. 

It is, however, advisable that misunderstandings do not arise 
about the meaning which the warrior element will have in the new 
Europe, focusing on the word 'militarism', similar to those already 
deliberately fostered - with full knowledge of the facts - by the 
democratic adversaries. It is not a matter of confining Europe to 
barracks, nor of defining a wild will-to-power as ultima ratio 5 or 
arriving at an obscurely tragic and irrational conception of life. 

Thus, in the first place it is necessary to become well aware 
that specifically warrior values, in the military context, are only 
representations of a reality which, in itself, can have a higher, n< >t 
merely ethical, but even metaphysical meaning. Here we shall not 
repeat what we have already had the opportunity to discuss at 



4 When the United States entered the war in 1917, President Woodrow Wilson 
characterised it as a crusade for democracy'. 



5 Latin: \he last res o if. 




114 METAPHYSICS OF WAR 

length elsewhere: 6 we will only recall that ancient Aryan humanity 
habitually conceived of life as a perpetual battle between meta- 
physical powers, on the one hand the uranic forces of light and 
order, on the other hand the dark forces of chaos and matter. 
This battle, for the ancient Aryan, was fought and won both in the 
outer and in the inner world. And it was the exterior batde which 
reflected the batde to be fought in oneself, which was considered 
as the truly just war: the batde against those forces and peoples 
of the outer world which possessed the same character as the 
powers in our inner being which must be placed under subjection 
and domination until the accomplishment of a pax triumphalis? 
What follows from this is an interrelation of the true warrior- 
like or heroic ethos with a certain inner discipline and a certain 
superiority, an interrelation which, in one form or another, always 
appears in all our best traditions. That is why only one who is 
short-sighted or prejudiced can believe that the unavoidable con- 
sequence of putting forward a warrior-like vision of the world 
and of maintaining that the new Europe wiU have to be formed 
under the sign of the warrior spirit must be a chaos of unleashed 
forces and instincts. The true warrior ideal implies not only force 
and physical training but also a calm, controlled and conscious 
formation of the inner being and the personality. Love for dis- 
tance and order, the ability to subordinate one's individualistic 
and passionate element to principles, the ability to place action 
and work above mere personhood, a feeling of dignity devoid of 
vanity are features of the true warrior spirit as essential as those 



6 Cf. above all our work Revolt Against the Modern World, Hoepli, Milan 1934. 
(Note added by Evola.) 

7 Even in the Christian doctrine of Saint Augustine, this view on the just war clearly 
remains: "Proficientes autem nondumque perfecti ira [to fight] possunt, ut bonus 
quisque ex ea parte pugnet contra atterum, qua etiam contra semet ipsum; et in uno 
quippe homine caro concupiscit adversus spiritum et spiritus adversus camem (De 
Civ., XV, 5). ['But with the good, good men, or at least perfectly good men, cannot 
war; though, while only going on towards perfection, they war to this extent, that 
every good man resists others in those points in which he resists himself. And in 
each individual "the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh" 
From St Augustins City of God and Christian Doctrine (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 
1988).] (Note added by EvoJa.) 



HE MEANING OF THE WARRIOR ELEMENT 



115 



which refer to actual combat: so that, from a higher point of view, 
combat itself can be worthwhile not so much for its immediate 
material results as for evidence of these qualities, which have a 
self-evident constructive value and can amount to elements of 
a special 'style', not only in a given area of the nation devoted 
specifically to soldiering, but also in a whole people and even 
beyond the frontiers of a given people. 

This last point must be especially stressed, precisely in relation 
to our fight for a new Europe and a new European civilisation. 
The relation which, according to the aforementioned Aryan and 
traditional view, exists between inner struggle and 'just war* is 
useful, in addition, in preventing the equivocal irrationalism of a 
tragic and irrational vision of die world, and also allows one to 
go beyond a certain hardening, devoid of light, found in some 
subordinate aspects of the purely military style. According to the 
highest view, which is resurfacing today in die staunchest and most 
potent forces of our peoples, warrior-like discipline and combat 
are connected with a certain 'transfiguration' and participation 
in an effective 'spirituality 5 . This is how an idea of 'peace', which 
has nothing to do with die materialistic, democratic-bourgeois 
conception is outlined; it is a peace which is not the cessation of 
the spiritual tension at work in combat and in warrior-like asceti- 
cism, but rather a sort of calm and powerful fulfilment of it. 

Fundamentally, it is here that the irreducible antithesis between 
the two different conceptions of 'civilisation' appears. There is not 
really 'imperialist materialism' and 'warlike brutality', on the one 
hand, and, on the other, love for culture' and interest in 'spiritual 
values'. Rather, there are spiritual values of a given type and of a 
properly Aryan origin, which oppose a different, intdlectualistic, 
'humanistic' and bourgeois conception of these. It is useless to 
delude ourselves that a warrior civilisation can have the same 
consideration for the so-called 'world of sciences and arts' as 
that which they enjoyed in the previous age of liberalism and of 
the Nineteenth-century bourgeoisie. They may retain their own 
significance but in a subordinate manner, because they represent 
not what is essential, but the accessory. The main thing consists 



116 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



instead in a certain inner style, a certain formation of the mind 
and character, a simplicity, clarity and harshness, a directly expe- 
rienced meaning of existence, without expressionisms, without 
sentimentalisras, a pleasure for commanding, obeying, acting, 
conquering and overcoming oneself. 

That the world of 'intellectuals' considers all this as unspiri- 
tuaT and almost barbaric is natural, but it has no significance- A 
very different seriousness and depth from the point of view of 
which the 'culture' of the bourgeois world appears itself as a reign 
of worms, of forms without life and without force, belongs to the 
'warrior' world. It will only be in a subsequent period when the 
new type of European is sufficiendy formed that a new 'culture', 
less vain, less 'humanist', can be expected to reflect something 
of the new style. 

Today it is very important to become aware of these aspects 
of the warrior spirit so that, in forming the bases of the future 
agreement and common civilisation of the European peoples, 
abstract and outdated ideas are not again brought into play. It is 
only by working from the energies which in the test of the fire of 
combat decide the freedom, dignity and mission of the peoples 
that true understanding, collaboration and unity of civilisation can 
be forged. And as these energies have little to do with 'culture' as 
understood by the 'intellectuals' and the 'humanists' to which they 
cannot be expected to rededkate themselves, so every abstract 
conception of right, all impersonal regulation of die relations 
between the various human groups and between the various 
States will appear intolerable to them. Here, another fundamental 
contribution which the warrior spirit can offer to the form and 
sense of a new Exiropean order becomes clear. Warrior spirit is 
characterised by direct, clear and loyal relations, based on fidelity 
and honour and a sound instinct for the various dignities, which 
it can well distinguish: it opposes everything which is impersonal 
and trivial. In every civilisation based on warrior spirit all order 
depends on these elements, not on legal paragraphs and abstract 
'positivist' norms. And these are also the elements which can 
organise the forces, aroused by the experience of combat and 



THE MEANING OF THE WARRIOR ELEMENT 117 

D msecrared by victory, into a new unity. That is why, in a certain 
.sense, the type of warrior organisation which was peculiar to some 
aspects of the feudal Roman-Germanic civilisation can give us an 
idea of what, perhaps, will work, in an adapted form, for the new 
Europe for which today we fight. In dealing with relationships, 
not only man-to-man, but also State-to-State and race-to-race, it 
is necessary to be able to conceive again of that obedience which 
does not humiliate but exalts, that command or leadership which 
commits one to superiority and a precise responsibility. Instead 
of the legislation of an abstract 'international law' comprising 
peoples of any and all sorts, an organic right of European peoples 
based on these direct relationships must come about. 

Smm cmqm* This Aryan and Roman principle defines the true 
concept of justice on the international plane as on the personal 
and is intimately connected to the warrior vision of life: everyone 
must have a precise sense of their natural and legitimate place in a 
well-articulated hierarchical whole, must feel pride in this place and 
adapt themselves to it perfecdy. To this end, in fact, the 'ascetic' 
element also comprised in the warrior spirit will have a particular 
importance. To realise a new European order, various conditions 
are necessary: but there is no doubt that in the first place must 
be the 'asceticism' inherent in warrior discipline: the ability to see 
reality, suppressing every particularistic haughtiness, every irratio- 
nal affection, every ephemeral pride; scorn for comfortable life 
and for all materialistic ideas of well-being; a style of simplicity, 
audacity and conscious force, in the common effort, on all planes. 



8 Latin: 'to each his ownl 



Varieties of Heroism 1 



A point to which we have often drawn the attention of our 
readers is that examination of the topic of 'inner race' is 
worthwhile, however incomplete it may remain at this stage, 
because of the fact that, rather than just noting the occurrence 
or non-occurrence of struggle and death among a people, it is 
necessary to consider their distinct 'style' and attitude regarding 
these phenomena and the distinct meanings which they may give 
to struggle and heroic sacrifice at any particular time. In fact, 
at least in general terms, we can speak of a scale along which 
individual nations may be placed according to how the value of 
human life is measured by them. 

The vicissitudes of this war have exposed contrasts in this 
respect, which we would like to discuss briefly here. We shall limit 
ourselves essentially to the extreme cases, represented, respec- 
tively, by Russia and Japan. 



Bolshevik Sub-Personhood 

It is now well known that Soviet Russia's conduct of war does 
not attach the slightest importance to human life or to humanity 
as such. For them the combatants are nothing but 'human mate- 
riaP in the most brutal sense of this sinister expression - a sense 
which, unfortunately, has now become widespread in a certain 

I Originally published on 19 April 1942 as 'Volti delleroismo * in 'Diorama mensile', 
// Regime Fascista. 

118 



VARIETIES OF HEROISM 



119 



sort of military literature - a material to which no particular atten- 
lii >n need be given and which, therefore, they need not hesitate to 
sacrifice in the most pitiless way, providing they have an adequate 
supply of it to hand. In general, as recent events have shown, the 
Russian can always face death readily because of a sort of innate, 
dark fatalism, and human life has been cheap for a long time in 
Russia. However, in the current use of the Russian soldier as 
the rawest 'human fodder' we see also a logical consequence of 
Bolshevik thought, which has the most radical contempt for all 
values derived from die idea of personhood and intends to free 
the individual from this idea, which it regards as superstition, and 
from the 'bourgeois prejudice' of the T and the 'mine', in order to 
reduce him to the status of a mechanical member of a collective 
whole, which is the only thing which is regarded as important. 

From these facts the possibility of a form of sacrifice and 
heroism which we would call 'telluric' and sub-personal, under 
the sign of the collective, omnipotent and faceless man, becomes 
apparent. The death of the bolshevised man on the battlefield 
represents, thus, the logical culmination of the process of dep- 
ersonalisation, and of the destruction of every qualitative and 
personal value, which underlay the Bolshevik ideal of 'civilisation' 
all along. Here, what Erich Maria Remarque had tendentiously 
proposed in a book which became notorious as the compre- 
hensive meaning of war can be accurately grasped: the tragic 
irrelevance of the individual in a situation where pure instinc- 
tuality, unleashed elemental forces and sub-personal impulses 
gain ascendancy over all conceivable values and ideals. Indeed, 
the tragic nature of this is not even felt, precisely because the 
sense of personhood has already vanished every higher horizon 
is precluded and collectivisation, even of the spiritual realm, 
has already struck deep roots in a new generation of fanatics, 
brought up on the words of Lenin and Stalin. We see here one 
specific form, albeit one almost incomprehensible to our Euro- 
pean mentality, of readiness for death and self-sacrifice, which 
affords perhaps even a sinister joy in the destruction both of 
oneself and of others. 



120 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



The Japanese Mysticism of Combat 

Recent episodes of the Japanese war have made known to us a 
'style' of dying which, from this point of view, seems to have 
affinities with that of Bolshevik man in that it appears to testify 
to the same contempt for the value of the individual and of 
personhood in general. Specifically, we have heard of Japanese 
airmen who, their planes loaded with bombs, hurl themselves 
deliberately upon their targets, and of soldiers who place mines 
and are doomed to die in their action, and it seems that a formal 
body of these Volunteers for death' has been in existence in Japan 
for a long time. Once again, there is something in this which is 
hardly comprehensible to the Western mind. However, if we try 
to understand the most intimate aspects of this extreme form of 
heroism we find values which present a perfect antithesis to those 
of the lighdess 'telluric heroism' of Bolshevik man. 

The premises here are, in fact, of a rigorously religious or, to 
put it better, an ascetic and mystical character. We do not mean 
this in the most obvious and external sense - that is, as referring 
to the fact that in Japan the religious idea and the Imperial idea are 
one and the same thing, so that sendee to the Emperor is regarded 
as a form of divine service, and self-sacrifice for the Tenno 1 and 
the state has the same value as the sacrifice of a missionary or 
martyr - but in an absolutely active and combative sense. These 
are certainly aspects of the Japanese politico-religious idea: how- 
ever, a more intimate explanation of die new phenomena must be 
looked for, on a higher plane than this, in the vision of the world 
and of life proper to Buddhism and above all to the Zen school, 
which has been righdy defined as the 'religion of the samurai', 
that is, of the Japanese warrior caste. 

This Vision of the world and of life' really strives to lift the 
possessor's sense of his own true identity to a transcendental 
plane, leaving to the individual and his earthly life a merely rela- 
tive meaning and reality. 

The first notable aspect of this is the feeling of 'coming from 
afar' -that is, th at earthly life is only an episode, its beginning and 

2 The Japanese term for the Emperor, meaning 'heavenly sovereign! 



VARIETIES OF HEROISM 



121 



ending are not themselves to be found here, it has remote causes, it 
is held in tension by a force which will express itself subsequendy 
in other destinies, until supreme liberation. The second notable 
aspect, related to the first, is that the reality of the T in simple 
human terms is denied. The term 'person' refers itself back to 
the meaning that it originally had in Latin, namely the mask of an 
actor, that is, a given way of appearing, a manifestation. Behind 
this, according to Zen, that is, the religion of the samurai, there 
is something incomprehensible and uncontrollable, infinite in 
itself and capable of infinite forms, so that it is called symbolically 
ruftya, meaning 'empty', as against everything which is materially 
substantial and bound to specific form. 

We see here the outline of the basis for a heroism which can 
be called 'supra-personal' - whereas the Bolshevik one was, con- 
trarily, 'sub-personal'. One can take hold of one's own life and 
cast it away at its most intense moment out of super-abundance 
in the certainty of an eternal existence and of the indestructibil- 
ity of what, never having had a beginning, cannot have an end. 
What may seem extreme to a certain Western mentality becomes 
natural, clear and obvious here. One cannot even speak here of 
tragedy - but for the opposite reason to that which applied in the 
case of Bolshevism: one cannot speak of tragedy because of the 
lived sense of the irrelevance of the individual in the light of the 
possession of a meaning and a force which, in life, goes beyond 
life. It is a heroism which we could almost call 'Olympian'. 

And here, incidentally, we may remark on the dilettante trivial- 
ity of one author who in a certain article has tried to demonstrate 
in four lines the pernicious character which such views, opposed to 
those which hold that earthly existence is unique and irrevocable, 
must have for the idea of the state and service to the state. Japan 
offers the most categorical refutation of such wild imaginings 
and the vigour with which our ally Japan wages her heroic and 
victorious batde demonstrates, on the contrary, the enormous 
warrior-like and spiritual potential which can proceed from the 
lived feeling of transcendence and supra-personhood to which 
we have referred. 



122 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



Roman Devotio 

Here it is appropriate to emphasise that, if the acknowledgment 
of the value of personhood is peculiar to the modern West, what 
is also peculiar to it is an almost superstitious emphasis on the 
importance of upbringing, which under recent conditions of 
democratisation has given rise to the famous concept of 'human 
rights' and to a series of socialistic, democratic and humanistic 
superstitions. Along with this clearly less than positive aspect there 
has been equal emphasis on the 'tragic', not to say 'Promethean', 
conception, which again represents a fall in level. 

In opposition to all this we must recall the 'Olympian' ideals 
of our most ancient and purest traditions; we will then be able to 
conceive as equally ours an aristocratic heroism, free from pas- 
sion, proper to beings whose life-centre is truly on a higher plane 
from which they arc able to hurl themselves, beyond any tragedy, 
beyond any tie and any anguish, as irresistible forces. 

Here, a little historical reminiscence is called for. Although 
this is not widely known, our ancient Roman traditions contained 
motifs concerning the disinterested, heroic offering of one's 
own person in the name of the state for die purpose of victory 
analogous to those which we have seen in the Japanese mysticism 
of combat. We are alluding to the so-called devotio. Its presupposi- 
tions are equally sacred. What acts in it is the general belief of the 
traditional man that invisible forces are at work behind the visible 
ones and that man, in his turn, can influence them. 

According to the ancient Roman ritual of devotio, as we under- 
stand it, a warrior, and above all a chieftain, can facilitate victory 
by means of a mysterious unleashing of forces determined by the 
deliberate sacrifice of his own person, combined with the will not 
to come out of the fray alive. Let us recall the execution of this 
ritual by Consul Decius in the war against die Latins (340 BQ, 3 and 



Publius Decius Mus wa$ a consul of ihe Roman Republic during the Latin War. He 
performed the devotio prior to the BattJe of Vesuvius after an oracle predicted that 
he would not survive it. When the Roman attack began to falter, he called upon 
the gods to fulfil their promise and plunged single-handed into the army of the 
Latins and was killed. The Romans won the battle. His son of the same name also 



VARIETIES OF HEROISM 



1 ! \ 



also the repetition of it - exalted by Cicero 4 (1%. II, 1 9, .61 : I ta 
[^ 37^ 39) _ by two other members of the same family. This nut;il 
had its own precise ceremony, testifying to the perfect kn« wiedgt 
and lucidity of this heroic-sacrificial offer. In proper hierarchical 
order, first the Olympian divinities of the Roman state, Janus, 
Jupiter, Qukinus, and then, immediately following this, the god of 
war, Pater Mars, and then, finally, certain indigenous gods, were 
invoked: 'gods - it is said - which confer power to heroes over 
their enemies'; by the virtue of the sacrifice which these ancient 
Romans proposed to perform the gods were called upon to 'grant 
strength and victory to the Roman people, the Quirites, and effect 
the enemies of the Roman people, the Quirites, with terror, 
dismay, and death' (cf. Livy, 8:9). 5 Proposed by the pontifex/ the 
words of this formula were uttered by the warrior, arrayed in the 
praeiesta, his foot upon a javelin. After that he plunged into the 
fray, to die. Incidentally, here the transformation of the sense of 
the word devotio must be noticed. While it applied originally to 
this order of ideas, that is, to a heroic, sacrificial and evocative 
action, in the later Rmpire it came to mean simply the fidelity of 
the citizen and his scrupulosness in making his payments to the 
state treasury {devotio rei annonariai). As Bouche-Leclercq 7 puts 
it, in the end, 'after Caesar was replaced by the Christian God, 
devotio means simply religiosity, the faith ready for all sacrifices, 
and then, in a further degeneration of the expression, devotion 
in the common sense of the word, that is, constant concern for 
salvation, affirmed in a meticulous and tremulous practice of the 



6 

7 



performed the devotio during the Third Samnite War in 295 BC. His son in turn 

sacrificed himself in the Battle of Asculum in 279 BC 

Marcus Tullius Cicero (106 BC-43 BC) was a great Roman statesman and orator. 

Evola is likely referring to his works De Finibus, Bonorum et Malorum (About the 

Ends of Goods and Evils), and Tusculanae Quaestiones (Questions Debated at Tus- 

culum). 

Titus Livius (59 BC-17 AD), author of The History of Rome. This passage is taken 

from livy, vol. 3 (London: AJ. Valpy, 1833), p. 16. 

A pontifex was a priest in the ancient Roman religion. 

Auguste Bouche-Leclercq (1842-1923), a French scholar of Roman history. His 

works have not been translated. 



124 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



cult'. Leaving this aside, in the ancient Roman devotio we find, as 
we have shown, very precise signs of a mysticism aware of hero- 
ism and of sacrifice, binding the feeling of a supernatural and 
superhuman reality tighdy to the will to struggle with dedication 
in the name of one's own chieftain, one's own state and one's own 
race. There are plenty of testimonies to an 'Olympian' feeling of 
combat and victory peculiar to our ancient traditions. We have 
discussed this extensively elsewhere. Let us only recall here that 
in the ceremony of die triumph, the victorious <£/** displayed in 
Rome the insignia of the Olympian god to indicate the real force 
within him which had brought about his victory; let us recall also 
that beyond the mortal Caesar, Romanity worshipped Caesar as 
'perennial victor', that is, as a sort of supra-personal force of 
Roman destiny. 

Thus, if succeeding times have made other views prevail, the 
most ancient traditions still show us that the ideal of an Olympian 
"heroism' has been our ideal as well, and that our people have also 
experienced the absolute offering, the consummation of their 
whole existence in a force hurled against the enemy in a gesture 
which justifies the most complete evocation of abysmal forces; 
and which brings about, finally, a victory which transforms the 
victors and enables their participation in supra-personal and 'fatal' 
powers. And so, in our heritage, points of reference are indicated 
which stand in radical opposition to the sub-personal and col- 
lectivist heroism we discussed above, and not only to that, but to 
every tragic and irrational vision which ignores what is stronger 
than fire and iron, and stronger than life and death. 



8 Latin: 'leader'. 



The Roman Conception of Victory 1 



Sallust described the original Romans as the most religious of 
mortals: rdigiossimi mortaks (Cat, 13), 2 and Cicero said that 
ancient Roman civilisation exceeded every other people or nation 
in its sense of the sacred: omnes gentes natiomsqne superavimm (Hal: 
trespon., IX, 19). Analogous testimonies are found in numerous 
variants in many other ancient writers. As against the prejudice 
of a certain historiography which persists in assessing ancient 
Rome from a solely legal and political point of view, what should 
be brought out is die fundamentally spiritual and sacred content 
of ancient Romanity, which should really be considered the most 
important element, because it is easy to show that the political, 
legal and ethical forms of Rome, in the last analysis, had as their 
common basis and origin precisely a special religious vision, a 
special type of relationship between man and the supra-sensory 

world. 

But this relationship is of a quite different type from that char- 
acteristic of the beliefs which came to predominate subsequently. 
The Roman, like ancient and traditional men in general, believed 
in a meeting and mutual interpenetration of divine and human 
forces. This led him to develop a special sense of history and time, 
to which we have drawn attention in another of our articles here, 



1 Originally published on 16 May 1943 as *La concezione romana della Vittoria in 
Augustea. 

2 See note 4 in 'The Sacrality of War*. 

125 



126 



METAPHYSICS Of WAR 



speaking about a book by Franz Ajtheim. 3 The ancient Roman felt 
that the manifestation of the divine was to be found in time, in 
history, in everything which is carried out through human action, 
rather than in the space of pure contemplation, detached from 
the world, or in the motionless, silent symbols of a hyperkosmia 
or 'super-world*. He thus lived his history, from his very origins 
onwards, more or less in terms of 'sacred', or at the very least 
'prophetic' history. In his Life of Romulus (1:8) Plutarch 4 says in 
so many words, 'Rome could not have acquired so much power 
if in one way or another it had not had a divine origin, such as 
to show to the eyes of men something great and inexplicable.' 

Hence the typically Roman conception of an invisible and 
'mystical' counterpart to everything visible and tangible which 
transpires in the human world. This is why rites accompanied 
every explanation of Roman life, whether individual, collective or 
political. Hence, also, the particular conception that the Roman 
had of fate: fate for him was not a blind power as it was for late 
ancient Greece, but the divine order of the world as development, 
to be interpreted and understood as means to an adequate science, 
so that the directions in which human action would be effective 
could be foretold, those along which this action could attract and 
actualise forces from above with a view not only to success, but 
also to a sort of transfiguration and higher justification. 

Since this set of ideas applied to the whole of reality it 
reaffirmed itself also for ancient Rome in the field of warlike 
enterprises, of battle, heroism and victory. This fact allows us to see 
the error of those who consider the ancient Romans essentially as 
a race of semi-barbarians, who prevailed only through brutal force 
of arms, borrowing from other peoples, such as the Etruscans, 
Greeks and Syrians, the elements which served them in lieu of true 
culture. Rather, it is true that ancient Romanity had a particular 
mystical conception of war and victory, whose importance has 
oddly escaped the specialists in the study of Romanity, who have 



3 Franz Althcim, A History of Roman Religion (London: Methuen & Co., 1 938) . 

4 Mestrius Plutarchus (46- 1 27) was a Greek historian. All of his biographies arc col- 
lected in Plutarch's Lives. 



THE ROMAN CONCEPTION OF VICTORY 127 

limited themselves to pointing out the many and well-documented 
traditions in question in a distracted and inconsequential manner. 

It was the essentially Roman opinion that, to be won materi- 
al, a war needed to be won - or, at least, favoured - mystically. 
After the Batde of Trasimene, Fabius says to the soldiers, *Your 
fault is to have neglected the sacrifices and to have failed to heed 
the warnings of the oracles, rather than to have lacked courage 
or ability' (Livy, History of Rome, 17:9, cf. 31:5; 36:2; 42:2). 

No Roman war began without sacrifices and a special college 
of priests - the Feciales - was in charge of the rituals related to 
war, which was considered a 'just war', iustum belhtm, only after 
these had been performed. As once pointed out by de Coulanges, 5 
die root of the military art of the Romans consisted originally 
in not being forced to fight when the gods were against it; that 
is, when by means of 'fetal' signs the agreement of forces from 
above with human forces was perceived to be absent. 

Thus, the focus of the enterprise of war fell on a more than 
merely human plane - and both the sacrifice and the heroism of 
the combatant were considered to be more than merely human. 
The Roman conception of victory is particularly important. 

In this conception every victory had a mystical side in the most 
objective sense of the term: in die victor, the chief, the imperator, 
applauded on the battlefield, was sensed the momentary manifes- 
tation of a divine force, which transfigured and trans-humanised 
him. The military victory ritual itself, in which the imperator (in 
the original sense, not of 'emperor', but of victorious chief) was 
lifted on a special shield, is not devoid of symbolism, as can be 
inferred from Ennius: 6 the shield, previously sanctified in the 
Capitoline temple of Jupiter, signifies here the aliisonum coeli clu- 
peum y the celestial sphere, beyond which victory raises the man 
who has won. 



5 Numa Denis Fustel de Coulanges (1830-1889), a French historian. His principal 
work was The Ancient City: A Study on the Religion, Laws, and Institutions of Greece 
and Rome, Garden City: Doubleday, 1956. 

6 Quintus Ennius (c. 239 BC-c 169 BC) was a poet and historian of the Roman 
Republic. Only fragments of his works survive. 



128 METAPHYSICS OF WAK 

Revealing and unambiguous confirmations of this ancient 
Roman conception are provided by the nature of the liturgy 
and the pomp of the triumph. We speak of 'liturgy' since this 
ceremony with which every winner was honoured had in Rome a 
character much more religious than military. The victorious leader 
appeared here as a sort of manifestation or visible incarnation of 
the Olympian god, all the signs and the attributes of whom he 
wore. The quadriga of white horses corresponded to that of the 
solar god of the bright sky, and the mande of the triumphant, the 
purple toga embroidered with gold stars, reproduced the celestial 
and stellar mande of Jupiter. And so did the gold crown and the 
sceptre which surmounted the Capitoline sanctuary. And the 
winner dyed his face with minimum as in the cult of the temple 
of die Olympian God, to which he then went to place solemnly 
before the statue of Jupiter the triumphal laurels of his victory, 
intending by this that Jupiter was its true author, and that he him- 
self had gained it, essentially, as a divine force, a force of Jupiter: 
hence the ritual identification in the ceremony. 

The fact that the aforementioned cloak of the triumphant 
corresponded to that of the ancient Roman kings could give rise 
to further considerations: it could remind us of the fact brought 
out by Altheim that even before the ceremony of the triumph 
of the king was defined he had appeared in the primitive Roman 
conception as an image of the celestial divinity: the divine order, 
over which the latter presided, was reflected and manifested in 
the human one, centred in the king. In this respect - in this con- 
ception, which, along with several others from the time of the 
origins, was to resurface in the Imperial period - Rome testifies 
to a universal symbolism, which is found again in a whole cycle 
of great civilisations in the Indo- Aryan world and Aryo-Iranian 
world, in ancient Greece, in ancient Egypt and in the Far East. 

But, not to wander from the argument, let us point out another 
characteristic element in the Roman conception of victory. It is 
precisely because it was seen as a more than merely human event 
that die victory of a chief often assumed for the Romans the 
features of a tinmen, an independent divinity, whose mysterious 



Mil ROMAN C ONCEPTION OF VICTOR Y 



I 



lire Nvas made the centre of a special system of ritual* iln i H m d 
m feed it, enliven it and confirm its invisible presence .mmn, 
nvn.The most well-known example is provided by the I vtnm 
I ,„W Each victory was believed to actualise a new centre of 
lurces separate from die particular individuality of the mortal 
man who had realised it; or, if we prefer, by victory the victor 
hid become a force existing in an almost transcendent order: a 
force not of the victory achieved in a given moment of history, 
but as the Roman expression stated exacdy, of a 'perpetual or 
wrennial' victory. The cult of such entities, established by law, 
v ftS designed to stabilise, so to speak, the presence of this force, 
so that it added invisibly to diose of the race, leading it towards 
outcomes of 'fortune', making of each new victory a means for 
revelation and reinforcement of the energy of the original victory. 
Thus in Rome, since the celebration of the dead Caesar and that 
of his victory were one and the same, and the games, which had 
ritual meaning, were consecrated to the Victoria Caesam, he could 
be considered as a 'perpetual victor'. 

The cult of victory, which was believed to have prehistoric 
origins, can be said more generally to be the secret spirit of the 
greatness of Rome and of Rome's faith in its prophetic destiny. 
Prom the time of Augustus the statue of the goddess Victory 
had been placed on the altar of the Roman Senate, and it vvas 
customary that every senator, before taking office, went to this 
altar and burned a grain of incense. The force of victory seemed 
thu* to preside invisibly over the deliberations of the am* hands 
reached out towards its image when, with the coming ofanew 
Princcps,* fidelity was sworn to him and again on the Third ot 
January of each year when solemn prayers were said in the Senate 
for the health of the Emperor and the prosperity of the Empire. 
It is particularly worthy of interest that this was the most tena- 
cious Roman cult of so-called 'paganism', surviving after the 
destruction of all the others. 



7 The Roman Senate. 

8 Another term for the Roman Emperor. 



130 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



Other considerations could be derived from the Roman notion 
of mors triumphal 'triumphal death', which shows various aspects 
with which we will perhaps deal on another occasion. Here we 
just want to add something about one special aspect of the heroic 
dedication connected to the ancient Roman concept of devotio. It 
expresses what in modern terms could be called a 'tragic hero- 
ism', but linked to a sense of supra-sensory forces and a higher 
and very specific purpose. 

In ancient Rome devotio did not mean 'devotion' in the modern 
sense of the meticulous and over-scrupulous practice of a reli- 
gious cult. It was, rather, a warlike ritual action in which the 
sacrifice of oneself was vowed and one's own life was dedicated 
consciously to 'lower' powers, whose unleashing was to contrib- 
ute to bringing victory, on one the hand, by endowing one with 
irresistible strength and, on the odier hand, by causing panic to 
the enemy. It was a rite established formally by the Roman State 
as a supernatural addition to arms in desperate cases, when it was 
believed that the enemy could hardly be defeated by normal forces. 

From I ivy (8:9) we know all the details of this tragic ritual 
and also die solemn formula of evocation and self-dedication 
which the one who intended to sacrifice himself for victory 
had to pronounce, repeating it from the pontifex, clothed in the 
praetesta, his head veiled, his hand at his chin and his foot on a 
javelin. After that he plunged to his death in the fray, a hurled, 
'fatal' force, no longer human. There were noble Roman families 
in which this tragic ritual was almost a tradition: for example, 
three of the stock of the Deci performed it in 340 B.C. in the war 
against the rebellious Latins, then again in 295 in the war against 
the Samnites, and once more in 79 at the Battle of Ascoli: as if 
this was 'a family law', as Livy puts it. 

As pure inner attitude this sacrifice may recall, by its perfect 
lucidity and its voluntary character, what still happens today in 
Japan's war: we have heard of special torpedo boats, or of Japanese 
aeroplanes, hurled with their crew against the target and, once 
again, the sacrifice, almost always performed by members of the 
ancient warrior aristocracy, die samurai, has a ritual and mystical 



THE ROMAN CONCEPTION OF VICTORY 



131 



aspect. The difference is certainly that they do not aim at a more 
than merely material action, a true evocation, to the same extent 
as in the ancient Roman theory of the devotio. 

And naturally, the modern and, above all, Western atmosphere 
for thousands of reasons which have become, so to speak, consti- 
tutive of our being over the centuries makes it extremely difficult 
to feel and to move forces behind die scenes and to give every 
gesture, every sacrifice, every victory, transfiguring meanings, 
such as diose discussed above. It is however certain that, even 
today, in this unleashed vicissitude one should not feel alone on 
the battlefields — one should sense, in spite of everything, rela- 
tionships with a more than merely human order, and paths which 
cannot be assessed solely by the values of this visible reality can 
be the source of a force and an indomitability whose effects on 
any plane, in our view, should not be underestimated. 



Liberations 



It is a principle of ancient wisdom that situations as such never 
matter as much as the attitude that is assumed while in them, 
and therefore the meaning that is attributed to them. Christianity, 
generalising from a similar viewpoint, has been able to speak of 
life as of a 'test' and has adopted the maxim vita est militia super 
terram. 

In the quiet and ordered periods of history, this wisdom is 
accessible only to a few chosen ones, since there are too many 
occasions to surrender and to sink, to consider the ephemeral 
to be the important, or to forget the instability and contingency 
which is the natural state of things. It is on this basis that what 
can be called, in the broader sense, the mentality of bourgeois 
life is organised: it is a life which does not know either heights or 
depths, and develops interests, affections, desires and passions 
which, however important they may be from the merely earthly 
point of view, become petty and relative from the supra-individual 
and spiritual point of view, which must always be regarded as 
proper to any human existence worthy of die name. 

The tragic and disrupted periods of history ensure, by force of 
circumstances, that a greater number of persons are led towards 
an awakening, towards liberation. And really and essentially it 
is by this that the deepest vitality of a stock, its virility and its 
unshakability, in the superior sense, can be measured. And today 

1 Originally published on 3 November 1 943 as 'Liberazionf in la Stampa. 

132 



LIBERATIONS 



133 



ta Italy on that front which by now no longer knows any distinc- 
i i< >n between combatants and non-combatants, and has therefore 
seen so many tragic consequences, one should get used to looking 
at things from this higher perspective to a much greater extent 
than is usually possible or necessary. 

From one day to the next, even from one hour to the next, 
as a result of a bombing raid one can lose one's home and 
everything one most loved, everydiing to which one had become 
most attached, the objects of one's deepest affections. Human 
existence becomes relative - it is a tragic and cruel feeling, but it 
can also be the principle of a catharsis and the means of bring- 
ing to light the only thing which can never be undermined and 
which can never be destroyed. We need to remember that, for a 
complex set of reasons, the superstition which attaches all value 
to purely individual and earthly human life has spread and rooted 
itself tenaciously - a superstition which, in other civilisations, was 
and remains almost unknown. The fact diat, nominally, the West 
professes Christianity has had only a minimal influence in this 
respect: the whole doctrine of the supernatural existence of the 
spirit and of its survival beyond diis world has not undermined 
this superstition in any significant way; it has not caused knowl- 
edge of what did not begin with birth and cannot end with deadi 
to be applied in the daily, sentimental and biological life of a suf- 
ficient number of beings. Rather, people have clung convulsively 
to that small part of the whole which is the short period of this 
existence of individuals, and have made every effort to ignore 
the fact that the hold on reality afforded by individual life is no 
firmer than that of a tuft of grass which one might grab to save 
himself from being carried away by a wild current. 

It arouses this awareness precisely not as something cerebral 
or 'devotional', but rather as a living fact and liberating feeling, 
which everything today diat is tragic and destructive can have, at 
least for the best of us: creative value. We are not recommending 
insensitivity or some misconceived stoicism. Far from it: it is a 
matter of acquiring and developing a sense of detachment towards 
oneself, towards things and towards persons, which should instil 



134 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



a calm, an incomparable certainty and even, as we have before 
stated, an indomitability. It is like simplifying oneself, divesting 
oneself in a state of waiting, with a firm, whole mind, and with 
an awareness of something which exists beyond all existence. 
From this state the capacity will also be found of always being 
able to begin again, as if ex nihilo? with a new and fresh mind, 
forgetting what has been and what has been lost, focusing only 
on what positively and creatively can still be done. 

A radical destruction of the 'bourgeois' who exists in every 
man is possible in these disrupted times more than in any other. 
In these times man can find himself again, can really stand in 
front of himself and get used to watching everything according 
to the view from the other shore, so as to restore to impor- 
tance, to essential significance, what should be so in any normal 
existence: the relationship between life and the 'more than life', 
between the human and the eternal, between the short-lived and 
the incorruptible. 

And to find ways over and above mere assertion and gim- 
mickry, for these values to be positively lived, and to find forceful 
expression in the greatest possible number of persons in these 
hours of trial is undoubtedly one of the main tasks facing the 
politico-spiritual elite of our nation. 



2 Latin: 'out of nothing! 



The Decline of Heroism 



War and rearmament in the world of the "Westerners' is once 
again about guaranteeing security. Intensive propaganda 
with a crusading tone, using all its tried and tested mcdiods, is in 
the air. Here, we cannot go thoroughly into the concrete questions 
which concern our specific interests, but rather hint at something 
more general, one of the inner contradictions of the notion of 
war, which undermines the foundations of the so-called "West*. 
The technocratic error of thinking of 'war potential 5 primar- 
ily in terms of arms and armaments, special technical-industrial 
equipment and the like, and assessing man — according to the 
brutal expression now widespread in military literature — simply 
as 'human resources' - has already been widely criticised. The 
quality and spirit of the men to whom the arms, the means of 
offence and destruction, are given have represented, still represent 
and will always represent the basic element of 'war potential'. No 
mobilisation will ever be 'total' if men whose spirit and vocation 
are up to the tests which they must face cannot be created. 

How are things, in this respect, in the world of the 'democra- 
cies? They now want, for the third time in this century, to lead 
humanity to war in the name of 'the war against war'. This requires 
men to fight at the same time that war as such is criticised. It 
demands heroes while proclaiming pacifism as the highest ideal. 



1 Originally published on 1 October 1950 as Tramonto degli eroi * in Meridiaw 
cl'ltalia. 



135 



136 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



It demands warriors while it has made warrior' a synonym for 
attacker and criminal, since it has reduced the moral basis of 
'the just war' to that of a large-scale police operation, and it has 
reduced the meaning of the spirit of combat to that of having 
to defend oneself as a last resort. 

The Bourgeois Ideal 

Let us examine this problem more closely. In what cause should 
the man of 'the Western bloc' go to war and face death? It is 
obviously nonsensical to respond in the name of the bourgeois 
ideal, the carefully maintained 'security' of existence which abhors 
risk, which promises that the maximum comfort of the human 
animal shall be easily accessible to all. Few will be deluded enough 
to imagine that, by sacrificing themselves, they can secure all this 
for future generations. Some will try to make others go and fight 
instead of them, offering as inducements beautiful words about 
humanitarianism, glory and patriotism. Apart from this, the only 
thing a man in such a world will fight for is his own skin. 

His skin is the same in Curzio Malaparte's 2 sense as here: 
'Certainly, only die skin is undeniable and tangible. One no longer 
fights for honour, for freedom, for justice. One fights for this 
disgusting skin. You cannot even imagine what man is capable 
of, of what heroisms and infamies, to save his skin. 5 

If one wants a profession of faidi from die democratic world 
beyond all its pretences, it is contained in diese words. They 
express the only credo, leaving aside mere verbiage and lies, with 
which it can spiritually equip its army This means to rush to the 
crusade against the Communist threat only out of physical terror; 
of terror for one's own skin; for the frightening, wavering ideal of 



Curzio Malaparte (1898-1957) was an Italian writer and journalist. Originally a 
Fascist supporter, he turned against Fascism after covering the war on the Eastern 
front for the Italian newspapers (documented in his books Kaputt and The Volga 
Rises in Europe). Here, Evola is referring to his post-war novel about the struggles of 
life in Italy under Allied occupation, The Skin (Evanston: Northwestern University 
Press, 1997). 



THE DECLINE OF HEROISM 



137 



Babbitt; 3 of bourgeois safety; of the 'civilisation' of the domesti- 
cated and standardised human animal, which eats and copulates, 
and the limits of whose horizon is Reader's Digest, Hollywood and 
the sports stadiums. 

Thus, those who are fundamentally lacking in heroism will 
seek to awaken warriors for the 'defence of the West' by playing 
upon the complex of anxiety. Since they have deeply demoralised 
the true Western soul; since they have debased and demeaned, 
firstly, the true basis of the state, hierarchy and virile solidarity; 
and secondly, the notion of war and combat, they must now play 
the 'trump card' of the anti-Bolshevik crusade. 



Enough of Illusions 

Not many illusions can remain concerning the sort of 'moral- 
ity' which can support this endeavour and which no industrial 
mobilisation with atomic bombs, flying superfortresses, super- 
sonic fighters and so on, can replace. It is with these c trump cards' 
alone that the Western world' now stands on the threshold of 
a possible third worldwide cataclysm, having broken down and 
insulted everything which had survived from the authentic war- 
rior traditions of Europe and the Far East. 

In the opposing bloc there are forces which combine technol- 
ogy with die elemental force of fanaticism, of dark and savage 
determination and of the contempt for individual life found 
among masses which, whether through their own ancient tradi- 
tions or through the exaltation of the collcctivist ideology, hardly 
value their own existence. This is the tide which will swell forth not 
only from the Red East, but from the whole of a contaminated 
and unleashed Asia. 

However, what is really required to defend 'die West 5 against 
the sudden rise of these barbaric and elemental forces is the 
strengthening, to an extent perhaps still unknown to Western 



Babbitt is a novel first published in 1922 by the American writer Sinclair Lewis 
(New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co.). As a result of its popularity, the term 'Babbitt* 
became synonymous with bourgeois conformism and philislinism, which is the 
theme of the novel. 




138 



METAPHYSICS OF WAR 



THE DECLINE OF HEROISM 



139 



man, of a heroic vision of life. Apart from the military- technical 
apparatus, the world of the 'Westerners' has at its disposal only a 
limp and shapeless substance - and the cult of the skin, the myth 
of 'safety' and of 'war on war', and the ideal of the long, com- 
fortable, guaranteed, 'democratic' existence, which is preferred 
to the ideal of the fulfilment which can be grasped only on the 
frontiers between life and death in the meeting of the essence of 
living with the extreme of danger. 

Some will object that after all that Europe has been through, 
we have had enough of 'militarism' and war-mongering, and 'total 
war' should be left in the past and forgotten. Granted, 'militarism' 
can be left behind us since it is only a degraded, inferior echo of 
a heroic (and far from exclusively belligerent) conception, and to 
condemn all heroism as 'militarism' is one of the expedients of 
'democratic' propaganda, an expedient which has now begun to 
backfire on its proponents. In any case, unfortunately there prob- 
ably won't be any choice. It will be hard for the forces already in 
motion to stop (in general, irrespective of the outcome of the 
current Korean affair) and there will only remain one course of 
action; to ride the tiger, 4 as die Hindu expression puts it. 

One of die most highly praised contemporary writers in 
i Europe has written things about modern war which he expe- 
rienced thoroughly and actively (he volunteered, was injured 
eighteen times, and was awarded the highest German military 
decoration), whose value will become more and more obvious 
in the times to come. 5 He has said that modern man, by creating 
the world of technology and putting it to work, has signed his 
name to a debt which he is now required to pay. Technology, his 
creature, turns against him, reduces him to its own instrument 

and threatens him with destruction. This fact manifests itself 
most clearly in modern war: total, elemental war, the merciless 
struggle with materiality itself. Man has no choice but to confront 
this force, to render himself fit to answer this challenge, to find 
in himself hitherto unsuspected spiritual dimensions, to awake 
to forms of extreme, essentialised, heroism, forms which, while 
caring nothing for his person, nevertheless actualise what the 
aforementioned author calls the 'absolute person' within him, 
thus justifying the whole experience. 

There is nothing else one can say Perhaps this challenge will 
constitute the positive side of the game for especially qualified 
men, given that game must be accepted and played out anyway. 
The preponderance of the negative part, of pure destruction, may 
be frightening, infernal. But no other choice is given to modern 
man since he himself is the sole author of the destiny and the 
aspect which he is now starting to see. 

This is not the moment to dwell on such prospects. Besides, 
what we have said does not concern any nation in particular, 
nor even the present time. It concerns the time when things will 
become serious, globally, not merely for the interests of the bour- 
geois, capitalist world, but for those men who know and, at that 
point, will still be able to gather together into an unshakeable bloc. 

This book sets out to study some of the ways in which the present age 
appears essentially as an age of dissolution. At the same time, it addresses 
the question of what kind of conduct and what form of existence are 
appropriate under the circumstances for a particular human type. 

This restriction must be kept in mind. What I am about to say does 
not concern the ordinary man of our day. On the contrary, I have in 
mind the man who finds himself involved in today's world, even at 
its most problematic and paroxysmal points; yet he does not belong 
inwardly to such a world, nor will he give in to it. He feels himself, in 
essence, as belonging to a different race from that of the overwhelming 
majority of his contemporaries. 

The natural place for such a man, the land in which he would not 
be a stranger, is the world of Tradition. I use the word tradition in a 
special sense, which I have defined elsewhere. 1 It differs from the com- 
mon usage, but is close to the meaning given to it by Rene Guenon in 
his analysis of the crisis of the modern world. 2 In this particular mean- 
ing, a civilization or a society is "traditional" when it is ruled by prin- 
ciples that transcend what is merely human and individual, and when 
all its sectors are formed and ordered from above, and directed to what 
is above. Beyond the variety of historical forms, there has existed an 
essentially identical and constant world of Tradition. I have sought else- 
where to define its values and main categories, which are the basis for 
any civilization, society, or ordering of existence that calls itself normal 
in a higher sense, and is endowed with real significance. 

Everything that has come to predominate in the modern world is 
the exact antithesis of any traditional type of civilization. Moreover, the 



The Modern World and Traditional Man 3 

circumstances make it increasingly unlikely that anyone, starting from 
the values of Tradition (even assuming that one could still identify and 
adopt them), could take actions or reactions of a certain efficacy that 
would provoke any real change in the current state of affairs* After the 
last worldwide upheavals, there seems to be no starting point either for 
nations or for the vast majority of individuals — nothing in the institu- 
tions and general state of society, nor in the predominant ideas, inter- 
ests, and energies of this epoch. 

Nevertheless, a few men exist who are, so to speak, still on their 
feet among the ruins and the dissolution, and who belong, more or less 
consciously, to that other world. A little group seems willing to fight on, 
even in lost positions. So long as it does not yield, does not compromise 
itself by giving in to the seductions that would condition any success it 
might have, its testimony is valid. For others, it is a matter of completely 
isolating themselves, which demands an inner character as well as privi- 
leged material conditions, which grow scarcer day by day. All the same, 
this is the second possible solution. I would add that there are a very few 
in the intellectual field who can still affirm "traditional" values beyond 
any immediate goal, so as to perform a "holding action." This is cer- 
tainly useful to prevent current reality from shutting off every horizon, 
not only materially but also ideally, and stifling any measures different 
from its own. Thanks to them, distances may be maintained — other 
possible dimensions, other meanings of life, indicated to those able to 
detach themselves from looking only to the here and nQjv. 

But this does not resolve the practical, personal problem — apart from 
the case of the man who is blessed with the opportunity for material iso- 
lation — of those who cannot or will not burn their bridges with current 
life, and who must therefore decide how to conduct their existence, even 
on the level of the most elementary reactions and human relations. 

This is precisely the type of man that the present book has in mind. 
To him applies the saying of a great precursor: "The desert encroaches. 
Woe to him whose desert is within!" 3 He can in truth find no fur- 
ther support from without. There no longer exist the organizations and 
institutions that, in a traditional civilization and society, would have 
allowed him to realize himself wholly, to order his own existence in a 
clear and unambiguous way, and to defend and apply creatively in his 



4 Orientations 



own environment the principal values that he recognizes within him- 
self. Thus there is no question of suggesting to him lines of action that, 
adequate and normative in any regular, traditional civilization, can no 
longer be so in an abnormal one — in an environment that is utterly dif- 
ferent socially, psychically, intellectually, and materially; in a climate of 
general dissolution; in a system ruled by scarcely restrained disorder, 
and anyway lacking any legitimacy from above. Thence come the spe- 
cific problems that I intend to treat here. 

There is an important point to clarify at the outset regarding the 
attitude to be taken toward "survivals." Even now, especially in Western 
Europe, there are habits, institutions, and customs from the world of 
yesterday (that is, from the ^bourgeois world) that have a certain persis- 
tence. In fact, when crisis is mentioned today, what is meant is precisely 
the bourgeois world: it is the bases of bourgeois civilization and society 
that suffer these crises and are struck by dissolution. This is not what I 
call the world of Tradition, Socially, politically, and culturally, what is 
crashing down is the system that took shape after the revolution of the 
Third Estate and the first industrial revolution, even though there were 
often mixed up in it some remnants of a more ancient order, drained of 
their original vitality. 

What kind of relationship can the human type whom I intend to 
treat here have with such a world? This question is essential. On it 
depend both the meaning to be attributed to the phenomena of crisis 
and dissolution that are ever more apparent today, and the attitude to 
be assumed in the face of them, and toward whatever they have not yet 
undermined and destroyed. 

The answer to this question can only be negative. The human type 
I have in mind has nothing to do with the bourgeois world. He must 
consider everything bourgeois as being recent and antitraditional, born 
from processes that in themselves are negative and subversive. In many 
cases, one can see in the present critical phenomena a kind of nem- 
esis or rebound effect. 4 Although I cannot go into details here, it is the 
very forces that, in their time, were set to work against the previous, 
traditional European civilization that have rebounded against those 
who summoned them, sapping them in their turn and carrying to a 
further degree the general process of disintegration. This appears very 



clearly, for example, in the socioeconomic field, through the obvious
relationship between the bourgeois revolution οί the Third Estate and
the successive socialist and Marxist movements; through democracy
and liberalism οη the one hand, and socialism οη the other. The first
revolution simply prepared the way for the second, whereupon the latter,
having let the bourgeoisie perform that function, aimed solely at
eradicating them.
Ιη view οί this, there is one solution to be eliminated right away:
the solution οί those who want to rely οη what is left οί the bourgeois
world, defending and using it as a bastion against the more extreme
currents οί dissolution and subversion, even ίΕ they have tried to reanimate
or reinforce these remnants with some higher and more traditional
values.
Ιη the first place, considering the general situation that becomes
clearer every day since those crucial events that are the two world
wars and their repercussions, to adopt such an orientation signifies
self-deception as to the existence οί material possibilities. The transformations
that have already taken place go too deep to be reversible.
The energies that have been liberated, or which are ίη the course οί
liberation, are not such as can be reconfined within the structures οί
yesterday's world. The very fact that attempts at reaction have referred
to those structures alone, which are void οί any superior legitimacy,
has made the subversive forces all the more vigorous and aggressive. Ιη
the second place, such a path would lead to a c~mpromise that would
be inadmissible as an ideal, and perilous as a tactic. As Ι have said, the
traditional values ίη the sense that Ι understand them are not bourgeois
values, but the very antithesis οί them.
Thus to recognize any validity ίη those survivals, to associate them
ίη any way with traditional values, and to validate them with the latter
with the intentions already described, would be either to demonstrate
a feeble grasp οί the traditional values themselves, or else to diminish
them and drag them down to a deplorable and risky form οί compromise.
Ι say "risky" because however one attaches the traditional ideas
to the residual forms οί bourgeois civilization, one exposes them to the
attack-in some respects inevitable, legitimate, and necessary-currently
mounted against that civilization.  

We can now return to the problem that really interests us. In all the 
critical situations treated up to now, their predominant trait is that of 
being the objects, indeed the victims, of the destructive processes set in 
motion: processes which are simply suffered by current humanity. This 
holds good both for those who have adapted to a life based on noth- 
ing and lacking any true direction, helping themselves with a system of 
anesthetics and surrogates, and eventually resorting to the surviving 
forms of a secure bourgeois existence, and for those who feel the exis- 
tential crisis of modern man in all of their being, and are consequently 
driven toward the kinds of revolt or risky existence that were mentioned 
above. 

This applies, therefore, to the vast majority of our contemporaries. 
In contrast, there is a different and much smaller category of modern 
men who, instead of submitting to the nihilist processes, seek to accept 
them actively. In particular, there are those who not only admit that 
the processes of dissolution are irreversible and that there is no going 
back, but who would not want to follow that path even if it existed. 
They willingly accept their condition of being without support or roots. 
Then the problem arises of how far the negative can be transformed 
into something positive. 

To someone who has the necessary character to assume such an 
attitude, the possibility opens of a new interpretation of the adventure 
of mankind wanting to be free, and of the crisis that is the consequence 
of this adventure. Thus arises the idea of a trial, and of destructions 
that are simply the consequence of not being equal to it, or as one might 
say, not being equal to one's own action. Those who are interested may 



34 



Active Nihilism 35 

recall the ancient myths concerning an audacious sacrilege in which it 
is not the sacrilege in itself that brings about the ruin of some symbolic 
personage, but lack of the necessary dignity or strength to accomplish 
an act that frees one from the divine bonds. 

The special human type who concerns us here and who partially fits 
the category in question may adopt the same point of view. As we recall, 
his differentiated character consists in facing the problems of modern 
man without being a "modern man" himself; he belongs to a different 
world and preserves within himself a different existential dimension. 
Unlike the others, his problem is not the dramatic search for a basis (in 
principle, he already possesses one), but that of his own expression and 
confirmation in the modern epoch, in his life here and now. 

With this human type in mind, let us examine the theme of "positive 
nihilism/ 5 or, if one prefers, the transition to the postnihilist stage. Since 
it is better to do so from a standpoint inside the modern world, rather 
than outside it, we can take as a provisional basis some of Nietzsche's 
fundamental ideas, to test their solidity. We may find, in fact, that the 
more recent exponents of modern thought have gone little further than 
Nietzsche in their search for a new meaning of life, despite all that is 
inconsistent and negative in his philosophy. 

Nietzsche considered himself "the first perfect nihilist in Europe, 
because he has already overcome nihilism, having lived it in his soul — 
having it behind himself, beneath himself, outside himself." 1 Having 
seen that "nihilism is the final, logical conclusion of our great values 
and ideals," and having asserted that "we must pass through this nihil- 
ism in order to grasp the true nature of the 'values 5 of the past," 2 he 
nevertheless considered nihilism as "a pathological, transitional stage" 3 
and proclaimed the "countermovement" that was destined to supplant 
it, without giving up the ground already won. 

Nietzsche showed that the point at which one realizes that "God is 
dead," that the whole world of "spirit," of good and evil, is only an illu- 
sion, and that the only true world is that which was negated or rejected 
in the name of the former, is the crux of a decisive test. "The weak shat- 
ter, the strong destroy what does not shatter them, while those stronger 
still go beyond the values that once served them." 4 Nietzsche calls this 
the "tragic phase" of nihilism, which leads to a reversal of perspectives; 



36 In the World Where God Is Dead 

nihilism at this point appears as a sign of strength, signifying "that the 
power to create, to will, has developed far enough that one has no fur- 
ther need for this general interpretation (of existence), of this introduc- 
tion of a meaning (into it)." 5 "It is a measure of one's strength of will 
to know how far one can do without a meaning to things, how far one 
can bear to live in a meaningless world: for then one will organize part 
of it," 6 Nietzsche calls this positive pessimism, or "the pessimism of 
strength," 7 and makes it the premise of a higher ethic. "If at first man 
needed a god, now he is thrilled with a universal, godless disorder, with 
a world of chance, where the fearful, the ambiguous, and the seductive 
are part of his very existence." In this world once again made "pure" 
and uniquely itself he stands erect, "conqueror of God and of nothing- 
ness." 8 The problem of the meaning of life is thus resolved with the 
affirmation that life is and can be a value in itself. 

This brings us to the precise point made above. The significance 
of all the crises of recent times can be summarized as follows: a man 
wanted to be free, for whom a life of freedom could spell only ruin. To 
say "God is dead" is only an emotional way of stating the basic fact 
of the epoch. But Nietzsche himself remarks that having "killed God, 
wasn't that perhaps rather too grand of us? Shouldn't we become gods 
in order to be worthy of it?" 9 After recognizing that "nothing exists, 
all is permitted," 10 and the "freedom of the spirit," the inevitable conse- 
quence is the challenge: "Now prove the nobility of your nature." 

A famous passage of Zarathustra gives the most pregnant formula- 
tion to the essence of the crisis. "You call yourself free? Let me hear 
your ruling thoughts, and not that you have escaped bondage. Are you 
one who deserved to escape from it? There are many who threw away 
their only worth when they threw away their servitude. Free from what? 
Why should Zarathustra care? Your eyes should answer plainly: free 
for what?" 11 And Zarathustra warns that it will be terrible to be alone, 
without any laws from above oneself, alone with one's own freedom 
in a desert place and an icy air, judge and avenger of one's own law. 
For him who only acquires any worth by serving, for him who had in 
his bonds not a cause of paralysis but a support, solitude appears as a 
curse; he loses courage and his initial pride deflates. These are the sen- 
timents, continues Zarathustra, that then assail the free man, and that 



Active Nihilism 37 

will not fail to kill him if he does not kill them first. In precise terms, 
and from a higher point of view, this is the essential ground of modern 
man's unhappiness. 

Dostoyevsky points out the same thing in analogous fashion: it is 
Kirilov's doctrine. The framework is identical: "Man only invented 
God so that he could live without killing himself. And this is the his- 
tory of mankind from its origins up to the present day," says Kirilov. 12 
The implication is plain: it is a necessity for man to have a center, a 
basic value. When he did not find it within himself, he placed it outside 
himself, projecting it onto God, whom he supposed to exist, certainly, 
but incarnated in an "other," and faith in this other provisionally solved 
the existential problem. Naturally this is not really, as Kirilov says, the 
whole meaning of the history of mankind; it is only that of the devo- 
tional phase of a theistic religion, a phase that already represents a dis- 
integration of the world of Tradition and precedes the critical point 
of metaphysical breakdown of which I have spoken. The eyes of the 
"free man" Kirilov are open: "I don't want to believe. I know that God 
doesn't exist, and can't exist." The consequence is therefore "If God 
does not exist, I am God. . . . To recognize that there is no God and not 
to recognize at the same time that one has become God is an absurdity 
and an incongruity, because otherwise one would not fail to kill one- 
self." One can dispense with the suicide that is an obsession of Kirilov's 
lucid folly, and speak simply of breakdown, disintegration, becoming 
lost in meaninglessness. In the face of this situation, terror and anguish 
arise: "He's like a wretch who has received a legacy but takes fright and 
won't set his hand to it, because he doesn't think himself worthy of it." 
We should not take seriously the act with which Kirilov thinks he can 
destroy his terror in the face of the divine legacy that he should accept, 
demonstrating at the same time "his divinity." And we can set aside all 
this emphatic talk of God and being God, for the real problem posed 
here is one of values, and of "being free for what?" 

Nothing better characterizes failure in the crucial test, the nega- 
tive result of the nihilistic experience, than the sentiment expressed by 
Sartre in these words: "We are condemned to be free." 13 Man takes 
absolute freedom for himself, but he can only feel this freedom as a 
condemnation. Metaphysical anguish is its counterpart. 



38 In the World Where God Is Dead 

Later we shall examine the specific themes of existentialism. For 
now, we shall see what can be retained of Nietzsche's views, not as a 
nihilist but as one who thought that he had left nihilism behind him, 
and thus created the premises for a higher existence and a new state of 
health. 

Once the idols have fallen, good and evil have been surpassed, 
along with all the surrogates of the old God, and the mist has lifted 
from one's eyes, nothing is left to Nietzsche but "this world," life, the 
body; he remains "faithful to the earth." Thereupon, as we know, 
the theme of the superman appears, "God is dead, now we want the 
superman to come." 14 The superman will be the meaning of the earth, 
the justification of existence. Man is "a bridge, not a goal," "a rope 
stretched between the brute and the superman, a rope stretched above 
an abyss." 15 This is not the place for a deep analysis of the manifold 
and divergent themes that crystallize in Nietzsche's work around this 
central motif. The essential can be spelled out as follows. 

The negative, destructive phase of Nietzsche's thought ends with 
the affirmation of immanence: all transcendent values, systems of ends 
and of higher truths, are interpreted as functions of life. In its turn, the 
essence of life — and more generally of nature — is the will to power. 
The superman is also defined as a function of the will to power and 
domination. One can see from this that Nietzsche's nihilism stops half- 
way. It sets up a new table of values, including a good and an evil. 
It presents a new ideal with dogmatic affirmation, whereas in real- 
ity this ideal is only one of many that could take shape in "life," and 
which is not in fact justified in and of itself, without a particular choice 
and without faith in it. The fact that the fixed point of reference set 
up beyond nihilism lacks a true foundation so long as one insists on 
pure immanence is already apparent in the part of Nietzsche's thought 
that deals with historical criticism and sociology. The entire world of 
"higher" values is interpreted there as reflecting a "decadence." But at 
the same time these values are seen as the weapons of a hidden will 
to power on the part of a certain human group, which has used them 
to hamper another group whose life and ideals resemble those of the 
superman. The instinct of decadence itself is then presented as a special 
variety of the will to power. Now, it is obvious that in function of a 



Active Nihilism 39 

mere will to power, all distinctions vanish: there are no more super- 
men or sheep-men, neither affirmers nor negators of life. There is only 
a variety of techniques, of means (far from being reducible to sheer 
physical force), tending to make one human class or another prevail; 
means that are indiscriminately called good in proportion to their suc- 
cess. If in life and the history of civilization there exist phases of rise 
and decline, phases of creation and destruction and decadence, what 
authorizes us to ascribe value to one rather than to the others? Why 
should decadence be an evil? It is all life, and all justifiable in terms 
of life, if this is truly taken in its irrational, naked reality, outside any 
theology or teleology, as Nietzsche would have wished. Even "anti- 
nature" and "violence against life" enter into it. Once again, all firm 
ground gives way. 

Nietzsche moreover wanted to restore its "innocence" to becom- 
ing by freeing it from all finality and intentionality, so as to free man 
and let him walk on his own feet — the same Nietzsche who had justly 
criticized and rejected evolutionism and Darwinism because he could 
see that the higher figures and types of life are only sporadic and for- 
tuitous cases. 16 They are positions that man gains only in order to lose 
them, and they create no continuity because they consist of beings who 
are more than usually exposed to danger and destruction. The philoso- 
pher himself ends with a finalistic concession when, in order to give 
meaning to present-day humanity, he proposes the hypothetical future 
man in the guise of the superman: a goal worth dedicating oneself to, 
and even sacrificing oneself and dying for. Mutatis mutandis, things 
here are not very different from the Marxist-communist eschatology, 
in which the mirage of a future human condition after the worldwide 
revolution serves to give meaning to everything inflicted on the man of 
today in the areas controlled by this ideology. This is a flagrant con- 
tradiction of the demands of a life that is its own meaning. The second 
point is that the pure affirmation of life does not necessarily coincide 
with the will to power in the strict, qualitative sense, nor with the affir- 
mation of the superman. 

Thus Nietzsche's solution is only a pseudosolution. A true nihilism 
does not spare even the doctrine of the superman. What is left, if one 
wants to be radical and follow a line of strict coherence, and what we 



40 In the World Where God Is Dead 

can accept in our investigations, is the idea that Nietzsche expressed 
through the symbol of the eternal return. It is the affirmation, now truly 
unconditional, of all that is and of all that one is, of one's own nature 
and one's own situation. It is the attitude of one whose self-affirmation 
and self-identity come from the very roots of his being; who is not scared 
but exalted by the prospect that for an indefinite repetition of identical 
cosmic cycles he has been what he is, and will be again, innumerable 
times. Naturally we are dealing with nothing more than a myth, which 
has the simple, pragmatic value of a test of strength. But there is another 
view that in fact leads beyond the world of becoming and toward an 
eternalization of the being. Nietzsche differs little from Neoplatonism 
when he says: "For everything to return is the closest approximation of 
a world of becoming-to a world of being." 17 And also: "To impose the 
character of being upon becoming is the supreme test of power," 18 At its 
base, this leads to an opening beyond immanence unilaterally conceived, 
and toward the feeling that "all things have been baptized in the font of 
eternity and beyond good and evil." 19 The same thing was taught in the 
world of Tradition; and it is uncontestable that a confused thirst for eter- 
nity runs through Nietzsche's works, even opening to certain momen- 
tary ecstasies. One recalls Zarathustra invoking "the joy that wills the 
eternity of everything, a deep eternity" 20 like the heavens above, "pure, 
profound abyss of light." 21 



7 



"Being Oneself" 



For now we must set aside such allusions to a higher dimension of expe- 
rience of a liberated world in order to define more precisely what such a 
vision of existence offers us in realistic terms* It is, in fact, the principle 
of purely being oneself. This is what remains after the elimination of 
what philosophy calls "heteronomous morality," or morality based on 
an external law or command, Nietzsche said this about it: "They call 
you destroyers of morality, but you are only the discoverers of your- 
selves"; 1 and also: "We must liberate ourselves from morality so that 
we can live morally." 2 By the latter phrase, he means living according to 
one's own law, the law defined by one's own nature. (This may result in 
the way of the superman, but only as a very special case.) 

This is on the same lines as the "autonomous morality" of Kant's 
categorical imperative, but with the difference that the command is 
absolutely internal, separate from any external mover, and is not based 
on a hypothetical law extracted from practical reason that is valid for 
all and revealed to man's conscience as such, but rather on one's own 
specific being* 

Nietzsche himself often presented these issues as though they were 
equivalent to naturalism. One frequently finds in him the simplistically 
physiological and materialistic interpretation of human nature, but it 
is basically inauthentic, accessory, and prompted by his well-known 
polemic against "pure spirit." In fact, Nietzsche saw deeper than that, 
and did not stop at the physical being when he spoke of the "greater 
reason" 3 contained in the body and opposed to the lesser reason: that 
which "does not say I, but is I," and which uses the "spirit" and even 
the senses as "little tools and toys." It is a "powerful lord, an unknown 
sage that is called oneself (Selbst)," "the guiding thread of the I that 
suggests all its ideas to it," which "looks with the eyes of the senses and 



41 



42 In the World Where God Is Dead 

listens with the ears of the spirit," He is not speaking here of the physis 
but of the "being" in the full ontological significance of the word. The 
term he uses, das Selbst, can also be rendered by "the Self" as opposed 
to the I (Ich): an opposition that recalls that of the traditional doctrines 
already mentioned between the supra-individual principle of the person 
and that which they call the "physical I." 

Once the crude physiological interpretation is cleared away, there 
emerges a valid attitude for the man who must stay standing as a free 
being, even in the epoch of dissolution: to assume his own being into 
a willing, making it his own law, a law as absolute and autonomous as 
Kant's categorical imperative, but affirmed without regard for received 
values, for "good" or "evil," nor for happiness, pleasure, or pain. 
(Nietzsche too regarded hedonism and eudaemonism, the abstract, 
inorganic search for pleasure and happiness, as symptoms of weaken- 
ing and decadence.) The man in question affirms and actualizes his 
own being without considering rewards or punishments, either here 
or in an afterlife, saying: "The way does not exist: this is my will, nei- 
ther good nor bad, but my own." 4 In short, Nietzsche hands on the 
ancient sayings "Be yourself," "Become what you are," 5 as proposi- 
tions for today, when all superstructure has fragmented. We shall see 
that the existentialists take up a similar theme, albeit less confidently. 
Stirner is, however, not to be counted among its antecedents, because 
in his idea of the "Unique" there is virtually no opening of the deepest 
dimensions of existence. One has to go back to M. Guyau, who equally 
posed the problem of a line of conduct beyond any sanction or duty; he 
wrote: "Authoritarian metaphysics and religion are leading-strings for 
babies: it's time to walk by oneself. ♦ . . We should look for revelation 
in ourselves. Christ is no more: each of us must be Christ for himself, 
and be joined to God as far as he will or can be, or even deny God." 6 It 
is as though faith still existed, but "without a heaven waiting for us or 
a positive law to guide us," as a simple state. Strength and responsibil- 
ity must be no less than they were long ago, when they were born from 
religious faith and from a given point of support, in a different human 
type and a different climate. Nietzsche's idea is identical. 

For our part, if this system is to be made acceptable as valid for 
the problem in hand, every unspoken but limiting implication has to 



"Being Oneself 9 43 

be eliminated from it, everything from which one might draw a new, 
illusory support. 

Post-Rousseau anarchic doctrines were already characterized by 
premises of this kind: the nihilism of the anarchist classics had as its 
counterpart the supposition of the fundamental goodness of human 
nature. Guyau, who has just been quoted, offers another example. He 
sought to found a morality "without sanctions or obligations/' a "free" 
morality, on "life." 7 But his notion of life was not the naked, authentic 
life free from attributes, but rather a life conceived as preventively and 
arbitrarily moralized or sterilized, a life in which certain tendencies 
are taken for granted: expansion, altruism, superabundance. Guyau 
formulated a new idea of duty: a duty that derived from power, from 
the life impulse, from the sense of one's own strength "that demands to 
be exercised" 8 ("I can, therefore I must"). Its limitation becomes obvi- 
ous when Guyau endows the expansive life impulse with an exclusively 
positive, even a social character, while presenting pure self-affirmation, 
expansion not toward others and for others but against them, as a self- 
negation and a contradiction of life, opposed to its natural expressive 
motion of increase and enrichment. It is enough to ask what could ever 
prevent a life that wanted to "negate" or "contradict" itself from doing 
so, and what would be censurable if it decided to take this route, to real- 
ize that Guyau has by no means made a tabula rasa, but has furtively 
introduced restrictions that more or less return to one of the systems of 
the old morality that he intended to supersede, because he recognized 
their vulnerability to nihilist criticism. 

The elimination of every presupposition also causes a crisis for 
much of the Nietzschean doctrine of the superman, which is no less 
unilateral because of its frequent emphasis on aspects of life contrary 
to those just posited by Guyau: will to power, hardness, and so on. In 
all strictness, to be purely oneself and to have a fully free existence, one 
should be able to accept, will, and say an absolute "yes" to whatever 
one is — even when there is nothing in one's nature that approaches the 
ideal of the superman; even if one's own life and destiny do not present 
heroism, nobility, splendor, generosity, and altruism, but decadence, 
corruption, debility, and perversion. A distant reflection of this path 
is to be found even in the Christian world, in Calvinism. It is the 



44 In the World Where God Is Dead 

doctrine of fallen man, broken by original sin but redeemed through 
"faith"; of man simultaneously justified and a sinner, in the face of the 
Absolute. But in the world without God, the result of such an attitude 
is to leave one to oneself in an extreme trial of strength and denuda- 
tion of the L Hence the Nietzschean claim of having "rediscovered 
the way that leads to a yes and a no: I teach you to say yes to all that 
strengthens, that gathers energy, that justifies the feeling of vigor." 9 
This claim is justified only when the corresponding command is trans- 
posed, internalized, and purified, detached from any specific content 
and especially from any reference to a greater or lesser vitality. It is 
rather a matter of either being capable or incapable of holding firm 
within, in one's own naked absolute being, with nothing to fear and 
nothing to hope for* 

At this level, the words about the liberation from every sin may 
become valid: "There is no place, no aim, no sense, in which we can 
be in any way unburdened of our own being" 10 — not in the physical 
world, nor in society, nor in God. It is an existential mode. As for the 
content of one's own law, as I have said, that remains and must remain 
undetermined. 

We can now summarize the positive gains to be made from the 
systems of Nietzsche and other thinkers along the same lines as his. For 
our purposes, however, we should remember that this analysis is not 
being made in the abstract, but in view of what may have value, not for 
everyone but for a special human type. 

This requires some extra considerations, because without this 
premise it is easy to see that even the solution of "being oneself" cannot 
really serve as a solid foundation. We shall see in due course that it is 
only a "first-grade solution," but before that there is a difficulty to be 
dealt with. 

It is clear that the rule of being oneself implies that one can speak 
of a "proper nature" for everyone, whatever it may be, as something 
well defined and recognizable. But this is problematic, especially at the 
present time. It may have been less difficult in societies that did not 
know individualism, in traditional societies organized along groups and 
castes where the factors of heredity, birth, and environment favored a 
high degree of internal unity and the differentiation of types, and where 



"Being Oneself" 45 

the natural articulations were reinforced and nurtured by customs, eth- 
ics, laws, and sometimes even by no less differentiated religious forms. 
All this has long ceased to exist for modern Western man, and has long 
been "superseded" along the road of "liberty"; thus the average modern 
man is changeable, unstable, devoid of any real form. The Pauline and 
Faustian lament, "two souls, alas, live in my breast," 11 is already an 
optimistic assumption; all too many have to admit, like a typical char- 
acter in Hesse, that they have a multitude of souls! Nietzsche himself 
admitted this state of affairs when he wrote: "One should not assume 
that many men are 'persons.' There are also men composed of several 
persons, but the majority possess none at all." 12 And again: "Become 
yourself: an injunction addressed only to a few, and which to an even 
smaller number appears redundant." 13 One can see now how prob- 
lematic is the very point that has hitherto seemed fixed: fidelity to 
oneself, the absolute, autonomous law based on one's own "being," 
when it is formulated in general and abstract terms. Everything is 
subject to debate — a situation accurately exemplified by characters in 
Dostoyevsky, like Raskolnikov or Stavrogin. At the moment when they 
are thrown back on their own naked will, trying to prove it to them- 
selves with an absolute action, they collapse; they collapse precisely 
because they are divided beings, because they are deluded concern- 
ing their true nature and their real strength. Their freedom is turned 
against them and destroys them; they fail at the very point at which 
they should have reaffirmed themselves — in their depths they find 
nothing to sustain them and carry them forward. We recall the words 
of Stavrogin's testament: "I have tested my strength everywhere, as you 
advised me to do in order to know myself. . . . What I have never seen, 
and still do not see, is what I should apply my strength to. My desires 
lack the energy; they cannot drive me. One can cross a river on a log, 
but not on a splinter." 14 The abyss wins out over Stavrogin, and his 
failure is sealed by suicide. 

The same problem evidently lurks at the center of Nietzsche's doc- 
trine of the will to power. Power in itself is formless. It has no sense 
without the basis of a given "being," an internal direction, an essential 
unity. When that is wanting, everything slides back into chaos. "Here 
is the greatest strength, but it does not know what it is for. The means 



46 In the World Where God Is Dead 

exist, but they have no end." We shall soon see how this situation is 
aggravated when the transcendent dimension is activated in it. 

For the moment, we note that in general, the phenomenon of remorse 
is closely linked to the situation of a divided and self-contradictory 
being. Remorse occurs when, despite everything, a central tendency 
survives in the being and reawakens after actions that have violated or 
denied it, arising from secondary impulses that are not strong enough 
to completely supplant it. Guyau speaks in this sense of a morality "that 
is none other than the unity of the being," and an immorality that, "on 
the contrary, is a splitting, an opposition of tendencies that limit one 
another." We know Nietzsche's image of the "pale criminal," a true 
mirror of the Dostoyevskian character just mentioned, "whose action 
has paralyzed his poor reason, as a chalk line paralyzes a chicken." 15 

We have clearly reached the point at which one must go beyond the 
"neutral" posing of the problem. To continue our agenda, I will now 
consider a line of conduct during the reign of dissolution that is not 
suitable for everyone, but for a differentiated type, and especially for 
the heir to the man of the traditional world, who retains his roots in 
that world even though he finds himself devoid of any support for it in 
his outer existence. 



The Transcendent Dimension 



"Life" and "More Than Life 



M 



Only this kind of man can use those positive aspects gleaned from 
the preceding analysis as his elementary basis, because when he looks 
within himself, he does not find a changeable and divided substance, 
but a fundamental direction, a "dominant," even though shrouded or 
limited by secondary impulses. What is more, the essential thing is that 
such a man is characterized by an existential dimension not present in 
the predominant human type of recent times — that is, the dimension 
of transcendence. 

The problems raised by these last considerations can be exemplified 
with reference to Nietzsche himself, for the tacit assumption of many 
of his attitudes is no different: it is the action, albeit unconscious, of the 
transcendent dimension. This alone can explain the otherwise arbitrary 
and contradictory quality of some of his statements; only this point of 
view also offers the possibility of integrating and consolidating them by 
not taking the wrong path of "naturalism." On the one hand, Nietzsche 
really felt the vocation of the particular human type just mentioned, 
both in his destructive role and in his effort to get beyond the zero point 
of values. On the other hand, rather than consciously taking up the 
existential dimension of transcendence, he was, as it were, its victim, 
the object rather than the subject of the corresponding energy in action. 
This gives one a sure guide for orientation throughout Nietzsche's phi- 
losophy, for recognizing both its limitations and its high value for our 
purposes. 

No less evident here is the solution given by turning the tragic and 
absurd vision of life into its opposite. Nietzsche's solution of the problem 
of the meaning of life, consisting in the affirmation that this meaning 



47 



48 In the World Where God Is Dead 

does not exist outside of life, and that life in itself is meaning (from 
which derive all the themes already mentioned, including the myth of 
the eternal return), is valid only on the presupposition of a being that 
has transcendence as its essential component. 

This is no place for the detailed proof of this thesis, which would 
belong in a special study of Nietzsche. We have already seen with regard 
to the "will to power" that it is not so much the general characteristic of 
life, but one of its possible manifestations, one of its many faces. To say 
that life "always surpasses itself," "wants to ascend, and to regenerate 
itself by rising and surpassing itself," 1 or that the life's secret is "I am 
that which must always conquer itself" 2 — all that is simply the result of 
a very unusual vocation projecting itself to the dimensions of a world- 
view. It is merely the reflection of a certain nature, and by no means the 
general or objective character of every existence. The foundation that 
really prevails in existence is much closer to Schopenhauer's formula- 
tion than to this one of Nietzsche's; that is, the will to live as eternal 
and inexhaustible desire, not the will to power in the true sense, or the 
positive, ascending drive to dominance. 

It is only, in fact, through the other dimension, that of transcen- 
dence, that life presents those characteristics that Nietzsche mistakenly 
generalizes and thinks he can attribute to it when he sets up his new 
values. His imperfect understanding of what was going on inside him 
explains not only the oscillations and limitations of his philosophy, but 
also the tragic side of his human existence. On the one hand, we have 
the theme of a pure, naturalistic exaltation of life, albeit in forms that 
betray a surrender of being to the simple world of instincts and pas- 
sions; for the absolute affirmation of the latter on the part of the will 
runs the danger of their asserting themselves through the will, making 
it their servant. On the other hand, many and indeed prevalent are 
the testimonies to a reaction to life that cannot arise out of life itself, 
but solely from a principle superior to it, as revealed in a characteristic 
phrase: "Spirit is the life that cuts through life" (Geist ist das Leben, 
das selber ins Leben schneidet). 3 

All the positive aspects of the way of the superman belong to this 
second aspect: the power to make a law for oneself, the "power to 
refuse and not to act, when one is pressed to affirmation by a prodi- 



The Transcendent Dimension 49 

gious force and an enormous tension" 4 ; the natural and free asceticism 
moved to test its own strength by gauging "the power of a will accord- 
ing to the degree of resistance, pain, and torment that it can bear in 
order to turn them to its own advantage" 5 (so that from this point 
of view everything that existence offers in the way of evil, pain, and 
obstacles, everything that has nourished the popular forms of savior 
religions, is accepted, even desired); the principle of not obeying the 
passions, but of holding them on a leash ("greatness of character does 
not consist in not having such passions: one must have them to the 
greatest degree, but held in check, and moreover doing this with sim- 
plicity, not feeling any particular satisfaction thereby" 6 ); the idea that 
"the superior man is distinguished from the inferior by his intrepidity, 
by his defiance of unhappiness" 7 ("it is a sign of regression when plea- 
sure begins to be considered as the highest principle" 8 ); the responding 
with incredulity to those who point "the way to happiness" in order to 
make man follow a certain behavior: "But what does happiness matter 
to us}" 9 ; the recognition that one of the ways to preserve a superior 
species of man is "to claim the right to exceptional acts as attempts 
at victory over oneself and as acts of freedom ... to assure oneself, 
with a sort of asceticism, a preponderance and a certitude of one's 
own strength of will," 10 without refusing any privation; to affirm that 
freedom whose elements include "keeping the distance which sepa- 
rates us, being indifferent to difficulties, hardships, privations, even 
to life itself" 11 the highest type of the free m^n being seen in "he who 
always overcomes the strongest resistances . . . great danger making 
him a being worthy of veneration" 12 ; to denounce the insidious confu- 
sion between discipline and enfeeblement (the goal of discipline can 
only be a greater strength — "he who does not dominate is weak, dissi- 
pated, inconstant") and holding that "indulgence can only be objected 
to in the case of him who has no right to it, and when all the passions 
have been discredited thanks to those who were not strong enough to 
turn them to their own advantage" 13 ; to point the way of those who, 
free from all bonds, obeying only their own law, are unbending in 
obedience to it and above every human weakness; all those aspects, in 
fine, in which the superman is not the "blond beast of prey" 14 and the 
heir to the equivocal virtus of Renaissance despots, but is also capable 



50 In the World Where God Is Dead 

of generosity, quick to offer manly aid, of "generous virtue," magna- 
nimity, and superiority to his own individuality 15 — ail these are the 
positive elements that the man of Tradition also makes his own, but 
which are only comprehensible and attainable when "life" is "more 
than life," that is, through transcendence. They are values attainable 
only by those in whom there is something else, and something more, 
than mere life. 

This is no place to go into detail about all the finer shades of mean- 
ing in the mass of Nietzsche's thought concerning these main points, nor 
into the confusions and deviations of which one must beware when one 
passes the point at which most of Nietzsche's admirers, as well as his 
detractors, have stopped. Life and transcendence are continually mud- 
dled in his philosdphy, and of all the consequences of his anti-Christian 
polemic, this confusion has been one of the worst. He characterizes 
the values negated by Christian ideals — the ideals of the pariah, the 
chandala — and which supposedly constitute the opposite, affirmative, 
antinihilistic ideals, as follows: "dignity, distance, great responsibility, 
exuberance, proud animality, the martial and victorious instincts, the 
apotheosis of the passions, of revenge, cunning, anger, voluptuousness, 
the spirit of adventurous knowledge" 16 ; then he enumerates among the 
positive passions "pride, happiness, health, love between the sexes, hos- 
tility and war, reverence, beautiful attitudes, good manners, strong will, 
the discipline of higher intellectuality, the will to power, respect for the 
earth and for life — all that is rich, which wants to give and to justify 
life, eternalize it, divinize it*" 17 The muddle is evident; it is a confusion 
of the sacred and the profane. 

But there is another point, and for us it is an even more important 
one. Even if one extracts from all this the effective forms of a self- 
transcendence, one faces an awkward situation when trying to speak of 
an "ascesis as a goal in itself" and when the superman is presented as 
the utmost limit of the human species, rather than as "more than man" 
and a being of a different nature, wielder and witness of a different dig- 
nity. One danger is that all the experiences not marked by a simple adher- 
ence to the pure, irrational, and instinctive substratum of life, in which 
the simple will to power is surpassed and the path is not that of a domi- 
nator of men and of external forces, but rather a dominator of oneself, 



The Transcendent Dimension 51 

remain closed off in the field of mere sensation. There is a significant 
passage in Nietzsche concerning this, in which the "saying no" to all 
the force surging within oneself is presented as a "Dionysism," 18 whereas 
a more fitting term would perhaps be auto-sadism. A lifelong discipline 
and an asceticism pursued inexorably for better or worse, through 
extreme trials, regardless of oneself and others, may have the mere value 
of an increased and exasperated sensation of "life," of an "I" whose 
sense of itself comes only from this savage and embittered sensation. All 
too often, it is in such terms that Nietzsche interpreted his own experi- 
ence and the way that he proclaimed. For our purposes it is all the more 
important to signal this wrong turning, because, all theory aside, it is 
easy to see that it lies at the basis of many extreme experiences on the 
part of those contemporary generations who courted disaster, as men- 
tioned above. 

As for the internal, "esoteric" interpretation of Nietzsche's per- 
sonal experience, taken as a whole beyond this pseudosolution, I have 
already indicated that the key to it is given by a passive experience 
of transcendence and of its activation. The cutting of all bonds, the 
intolerance of all limits, the pure and incoercible impulse to overcome 
without any determined goal, to always move on beyond any given 
state, experience, or idea, and naturally and even more beyond any 
human attachment to a given person, fearing neither contradictions 
nor destructions, thus pure movement, with all that that implies of dis- 
solution — "advancing with a devouring fire tl^at leaves nothing behind 
itself," to use an expression from an ancient wisdom tradition, though 
it applies to a very different context — these essential characteristics 
that some have already recognized in Nietzsche can be explained pre- 
cisely as so many forms in which the transcendent acts and manifests. 
But the fact that this is not recognized and admitted as such, the fact, 
therefore, that this energy remains in the closed circle of immanence 
and of "life," generates a higher voltage than the circuit can sustain. 
This fact, moreover, may be the true and deeper cause of the final 
collapse of Nietzsche the man. Besides, he always had a sensation of 
living dangerously. By 1881 he was writing to Gast: "I have the feeling 
of living a life that is risky to the highest degree — I am one of those 
machines that might explode." 19 At other times he spoke of a "continual 



52 In the World Where God Is Dead 

proximity to danger," and it was surely from this that he drew the 
generalization that "superior men find themselves in continual inner 
and outer peril." 

It is clear, even in this particular respect, how important Nietzsche 
is as a symbolic figure for our entire investigation. His case illustrates 
in precise terms what can, and indeed must, occur in a human type in 
which transcendence has awakened, yes, but who is uncentered with 
regard to it. We shall see that the essential themes of existentialism are 
to be interpreted no differently. 

This is not the way of the man we have in mind, who has quite 
another constitution, A clean line of division must be drawn. But first it 
is useful to see what is to be expected in the case of those who remain 
on this side of the lifte, that is, in those who follow the way of imma- 
nence unflinchingly, without turning back, without lowering their level, 
but also without the capacity to reach the turning point that alone can 
make good their lack, from the very start, of the quality I have indi- 
cated in the man of Tradition, in the man who is constitutionally not 
modern. Once they have entered on the way of absolute affirmation, 
and have mastered all those forms of "ascesis" and the activation of a 
higher intensity of life that we have mentioned, their only saving solu- 
tion is in a conscious change of polarity; in the possibility that at a 
given point, in given situations or environments, by a kind of ontologi- 
cal rupture of level, their life would be turned upside down, as it were, 
and transformed into a different quality — the mehr leben [living more] 
would give place to a mehr-als-leben [more than living], to use the neat 
expression suggested in another context by Georg Simmel. 20 

This is a possibility that can be entertained even in this present 
epoch. The few who can accomplish it may achieve, even under current 
conditions, a qualification analogous to what was inborn in the type 
under consideration. Certain gropings toward openings of the kind are 
not unknown today, alongside the traumatization of existence. One 
typical sign, for example, is the interest in Zen felt by some members 
of the Beat Generation. The condition for it is something like a sudden 
illumination — the satori of Zen. Without it, the path of those who have 
undergone experiences like Nietzsche's — and, in general, of those in 
whom, for one reason or another and with or without their volition, 



The Transcendent Dimension 53 

transcendence has awakened in the human circuit as an energy in the 
world where God is dead — is a path that leads to the abyss. It is cold 
comfort in such cases to speak of "the damned saints of our time" or of 
"angels with the face of a criminal or a pervert"; that is pure, gratuitous 
romanticism. 

In the contrary and positive case, the result might be expressed as a 
transition from the plane of "Dionysus" to that of a spiritual superior- 
ity, known in antiquity under the Apollonian or Olympian symbol. It 
is of capital importance to recognize that this is the only solution that 
does not involve a regression, and that it is the antithesis of any solu- 
tion of the religious or devotional type. The "conversion" of certain 
contemporaries who found themselves unable to sustain the tension of 
the nihilistic climate, or who faced the experiences in question superfi- 
cially, as mere intellectuals, represent cases of surrender that are devoid 
of any interest for us. 



9 

Beyond Theism 
and Atheism 



Following on from this, and before taking up the positive part of our 
subject, I should return to what was said earlier when specifying what 
had reached, or was reaching, the point of crisis in the modern world. 

I have explained that the crisis on the social plane concerned bour- 
geois society and civilization. From the spiritual point of view, I spoke 
of the double aspect of the process of "emancipation" that has led to the 
present situation: first of its solely destructive and regressive aspect, then 
of how it faces a differentiated human type with the risky ordeal of a com- 
plete internal liberation. Pursuing the latter aspect, I would make another 
point, namely that one of the causes favoring the processes of dissolution 
has been the confused sense of a true fact: the sense that everything in 
the recent West of a religious nature, especially Christianity, belongs to 
the "all too human" and has little to do with really transcendent values, 
beside being fairly incompatible, as a general climate and an internal atti- 
tude, with the dispositions and vocations proper to a higher human type. 

In particular, an important factor has been the mutilated charac- 
ter of Christianity when compared to the majority of other traditional 
forms; mutilated, because it does not possess an "esotericism," an inner 
teaching of a metaphysical character beyond the truths and dogmas of 
the faith offered to the common people. The extensions represented by 
sporadic experiences that are simply "mystical'* and little understood 
cannot make up for this essential lack in Christianity as a whole. This 
is why the work of demolition was so easy with the rise of so-called free 
thought, whereas in a different, complete tradition the presence of a 
body of teachings above the simply religious level would probably have 
prevented it. 



54 



Beyond Theism and Atheism 55 

What is the God whose death has been announced? Nietzsche him- 
self replies: "Only the god of morality has been conquered." 1 He also 
asks: "Is there sense in conceiving of a god beyond good and evil?" 2 The 
reply must be affirmative. "Let God slough off his moral skin, and we 
shall see him reappear beyond good and evil." 3 What has disappeared 
is therefore not the god of metaphysics, but the god of theism, the per- 
sonal god who is a projection of moral and social values and a support 
for human weakness. Now, the conception of a god in different terms 
is not only possible but essential within all the great traditions before 
and beside Christianity, and the principle of nonduality is also evident 
in them. These other traditions recognized as the ultimate foundation of 
the universe a principle anterior and superior to all antitheses, includ- 
ing those of immanence and transcendence considered unilaterally. This 
conferred on existence — on all of existence, including that part of it that 
appears problematic, destructive, and "evil" — the supreme justification 
that was being sought through a liberated worldview, to be affirmed 
beyond the demolitions of nihilism. Zarathustra in fact announces noth- 
ing new when he says: "Everything that becomes seems to me divine 
dance and divine whim, and the liberated world returns to itself" 4 ; it 
is the same idea that Hinduism casts in the well-known symbol of the 
dance and play of the naked god Shiva. As another example, we might 
recall the doctrine of the transcendent identity of samsara (the world 
of becoming) with nirvana (the unconditioned), that ultimate peak of 
esoteric wisdom. In the Mediterranean region, the saying of the final 
mystery initiation, "Osiris is a black god," refers to a similar level; and 
one could also include the teachings of Neoplatonism and of a few mys- 
tics of high stature concerning the metaphysical, impersonal, and super- 
personal One, and so forth — right up to William Blake's allegory of the 
"Marriage of Heaven and Hell" and the Goethean idea of the God of 
the "free glance" who does not judge according to good and evil, an 
idea encountered from the ancient West right up to Far Eastern Taoism. 
We see one of the most drastic proofs of this wisdom in the words of an 
ascetic on the point of being murdered by a European soldier: "Don't 
deceive me! You too are God!" 

In the course of the involutional process described in the introduc- 
tion, such horizons have gradually vanished from view. In cases like 



56 In the World Where God Is Dead 

Buddhism and Taoism it is very evident that they have passed from the 
metaphysical plane to the religious and devotional one, in terms of a 
regression due to the diffusion and profanation of the original inner 
doctrine, which most people are incapable of understanding and follow- 
ing. 5 In the West, the conception of the sacred and the transcendent in 
devotional and moral terms, which in other systems belonged only to the 
popular or regressive forms, became predominant and all but exclusive. 

We should mention, however, that even in the Christian world there 
have been some allusions on the margins of Johannine mysticism to a 
future epoch of a higher freedom. Joachim de Flore gave out that the 
"third age," the age of the Spirit following those of the Father and the 
Son, would be that of freedom; and the "Brethren of the Free Spirit," 
along similar lines, proclaimed an "anomie," a liberty from the Law, 
from good and evil, in terms that even Nietzsche's superman would not 
have dared to profess. Echoes of these anticipations are to be found 
in Jacopone da Todi himself, when in his Hymn to Holy Poverty and 
Its Threefold Heaven 6 he tells us "do not fear Hell, do not hope for 
Heaven," and that one should "not rejoice in any good, nor mourn any 
adversity"; when he refers to a "virtue that asks not why" and goes so 
far as to dispense with virtue itself, possessing all things "in freedom 
of spirit," this being for him the inner and symbolic sense of true "pov- 
erty." 

The conclusion to be drawn from all of this is that a group of con- 
cepts considered in the Christian West as essential and indispensable for 
any "true" religion — the personal god of theism, the moral law with the 
sanctions of heaven and hell, the limited conception of a providential 
order and a "moral and rational" finalism of the world, faith resting on 
a largely emotional, sentimental, and subintellectual basis — all of these 
are foreign to a metaphysical vision of existence such as is well attested 
in the world of Tradition. The God who has been attacked is God con- 
ceived as the center of gravity of all this merely religious system. But in 
fact this may open the horizon of a new essentiality for those who accept 
as a trial of their strength — one might even say, of their faith in the 
higher sense — all the dissolving processes brought about by the direc- 
tion that civilization has taken in recent times. The "moral skin" falls off 
a God who has finished up as opium of the people, or as the counterpart 



Beyond Theism and Atheism 57 

of the petty morality that the bourgeois world substitutes for the greater 
morality. But the essential core, represented by metaphysical teachings 
such as those just mentioned, remains inviolate for those who can per- 
ceive and live them, remains inaccessible to all those nihilistic processes, 
and withstands any dissolution. 

After this essential clarification and widening of perspectives, we 
are now ready to gather up everything from the themes considered 
hitherto that may have a positive value today for the human type with 
whom we are concerned. 

As far as worldviews are concerned, we are dealing with a concep- 
tion of reality freed from the categories of good and evil, but with a meta- 
physical foundation, not a naturalistic or pantheistic one. Being knows 
nothing of good or evil, nor do the great laws of things, nor the Absolute. 
A good or an evil exists solely in function of an end, and what is the stan- 
dard by which to judge this end and thereby fix the ultimate legitimacy 
of an action or a being? Even the theology of Providence and the efforts 
of theistic theodicy to prop up the concept of the moral God cannot do 
away with the idea of the Great Economy that includes evil, in which 
evil is only a particular aspect of a higher order, transcending the little 
human categories of the individual and the collectivity of individuals. 

The "other world" attacked by European nihilism, presented by the 
latter as sheer illusion or condemned as an evasion, is not another real- 
ity; it is another dimension of reality in which the real, without being 
negated, acquires an absolute significance in the inconceivable naked- 
ness of pure Being. 

In an epoch of dissolution, this is the essential basis of a vision of 
life that is appropriate for the man reduced to himself, who must prove 
his own strength. Its counterpart is to be central or to make oneself so, 
to know or discover the supreme identity with oneself. It is to perceive 
the dimension of transcendence within, and to anchor oneself in it, 
making of it the hinge that stays immobile even when the door slams 
(an image from Meister Eckhart). From this point on, any "invocation" 
or prayer becomes existentially impossible. The heritage of "God" that 
one dared not accept is not that of the lucid madness of Kirilov; it is the 
calm sense of a presence and an intangible possession, of a superiority 
to life whilst in the very bosom of life. The deeper sense of what has 



58 In the World Where God Is Dead 

been said about the "new nobility" is no different: "Divinity consists 
in precisely this; that the gods exist, but no God." We could use the 
image of a ray of light proceeding with no need to turn back, and car- 
rying its luminous energy and the impulse from the center from which 
it originated. It is also the absolute claim to one's own position in terms 
that exclude the theme of religious crisis, "feeling oneself abandoned by 
God." In such a state, that would be equivalent to a God who had aban- 
doned himself. Similarly, no negation of God is possible: to negate or 
doubt God would be to negate or doubt oneself. Once the idea of a per- 
sonal God has disappeared, God ceases to be a "problem," an object of 
"belief," or a need of the soul; the terms "believer," "atheist," or "free- 
thinker" appear nonsensical. One has gone beyond both attitudes. 

Once this point 4s grasped, we can indicate the terms in which 
to deal with the existential challenge in relation to life's negativity, 
tragedy, pain, problems, and absurdities. Seneca said that no specta- 
cle is more pleasing to the gods than that of the superior man grap- 
pling with adversity. Only thus can he know his own strength — and 
Seneca adds that it is the men of valor who are sent to the riskiest 
positions or on difficult missions, while the spineless and feeble are 
left behind. There is the well-known maxim: "That which does not 
destroy us makes us stronger." 7 In our case, the basis for this courage 
refers to the dimension of transcendence in oneself: it is attested and 
confirmed in all situations of chaos and dissolution, thus turning them 
to our own advantage. It is the antithesis of an arrogant hardening of 
the physical individuality in all its forms, whether unilaterally Stoic 
or Nietzschean. Instead, it is the conscious activation in oneself of the 
other principle and of its strength, in experiences, moreover, that are 
not merely undergone but also sought, as I shall explain later. This 
must be kept firmly in mind. 

In some cases nowadays, the shock of reality and the consequent 
trauma may serve not to validate and increase a strength that is already 
present, but to reawaken it. These are the cases in which only a thin 
film separates the principle of being in a person from that of the merely 
human individuality. Situations of depression, emptiness, or tragedy 
whose negative solution is the return to religion may through a positive 
reaction lead to this awakening. Even in some of the most advanced 



Beyond Theism and Atheism 59 

modern literature one finds curious testimonies of moments of libera- 
tion realized in the midst of disintegration. One example will suffice, 
from an author already cited. Henry Miller, after all the signs of the 
chaotic disintegration of a meaningless life, after stupefaction at "the 
grandiose collapse of a whole world," speaks of a vision that justifies 
everything as it is — "a sort of eternity in suspense in which everything 
is justified, supremely justified*" One looks for a miracle outside, he 
says, "while a counter counts within and there is no hand that can 
reach it or stop it." Only a sudden shock can do it. Then a new current 
arises in the being. This makes him say: "Perhaps in reading this, one 
has still the impression of chaos but this is written from a live center 
and what is chaotic is merely peripheral, the tangential shreds, as it 
were, of a world which no longer concerns me." 8 This brings us back, 
in a way, to the rupture of levels mentioned above, which has the virtue 
of instilling a different quality in the circuit of mere "life." 



10 

Invulnerability 
Apollo and Dionysus 



Up to now we have been establishing the rule for being oneself. Now 
we must bring to light the rule for proving oneself, then unite and 
specify the two principles with particular reference to the human type 
that concerns us. Just as this type is dual in its essential structure — 
in its determination as an individual, and its dimension of transcen- 
dence — being itself, and knowing itself through proving itself, present 
two quite distinct degrees. 

With regard to the first degree, we have already noted the difficulty, 
especially in our times, that the principle of being oneself encounters in 
the vast majority of individuals, given their lack of a basic unity or even 
of one predominant and constant tendency among a multitude of oth- 
ers. Only in exceptional cases are these words of Nietzsche's valid: "One 
does best never to speak of two very lofty things, measure and mean. 
A few know their powers and their signs, thanks to the mystery paths 
of inner experiences and conversions. They venerate something divine 
in them, and abhor speaking out loud." 1 But in an age of dissolution, it 
is difficult even for one who possesses a basic internal form to know it, 
and thereby to know "himself," otherwise than through an experiment. 
Hence we recall the line already mentioned, to be understood now as the 
search for, or the acceptance of, those situations or alternatives in which 
the prevailing force, one's own "true nature," is compelled to manifest 
and make itself known. 

The only actions that can be valid for this purpose are those that 
arise from the depths. Peripheral or emotional reactions do not qual- 
ify, for those are like reflex movements provoked by a stimulus, aris- 
ing "long before the depth of one's own being has been touched or 



60 



Invulnerability 6 1 

questioned," 2 as Nietzsche himself said, seeing in this very incapacity 
for deep impressions and engagement, and in this skin-deep reactivity 
at the mercy of every sensation, a deplorable characteristic of modern 
man. For many people it is as though they have to relearn how to act 
in the true sense, actively, as one might say, and also typically. Even 
for the man whom we have in mind, taken in his worldly aspect, this 
is an essential requirement today. We might note the corresponding 
discipline that is so important in traditional "inner teachings": that of 
self-remembering or self- awareness. 3 G. L Gurdjieff, who has taught 
similar things in our time, describes the contrary state as that of being 
"breathed" or "sucked" into ordinary existence without any aware- 
ness of the fact, without noticing the automatic or "somnambulistic" 
character that this existence has from a higher point of view. "I am 
sucked in by my thoughts, my memories, my desires, my sensations, by 
the steak I eat, the cigarette I smoke, the love I make, by the sunshine, 
the rain, by this tree, by that passing car, by this book." Thus one is 
a shadow of oneself. Life in a state of being, the "active act," "active 
sensation," and so on are unknown states. But this is not the place to 
digress further about this special method of realization. 4 

This trial through self-knowledge under the stimulus of various 
experiences and various encounters with reality may be associated in a 
certain sense with the maxim of amor fati (love of fate). 5 Karl Jaspers 
has rightly said that this is not so much a precept of passive obedi- 
ence to a necessity presumed to be predetermined and knowable, as 
an injunction to face each experience and everything in one's existence 
that is uncertain, ambiguous, and dangerous with the feeling that one 
will never do anything other than follow one's own path. The essential 
thing in this attitude is a kind of transcendent confidence that gives 
security and intrepidity, and it can be included among the positive ele- 
ments in the line of conduct that is gradually being delineated. 

The problem of being oneself has a particular and subordinate solu- 
tion in terms of a unification. Once one has discovered through experi- 
ment which of one's manifold tendencies is the central one, one sets about 
identifying it with one's will, stabilizing it, and organizing all one's sec- 
ondary or divergent tendencies around it. This is what it means to give 
oneself a law, one's own law. As we have seen, the incapacity to do this, 



62 In the World Where God Is Dead 

"the many discordant souls enclosed in my own breast/ 5 and the refusal 
to obey even before one is capable of commanding oneself are causes 
of the disaster that may well end the path of a being driven toward the 
boundary situation in the world without God. There is a relevant saying: 
"He who cannot command himself must obey. And more than one can 
command himself, but is still far from being able to obey himself." 6 

There is an example from the world of Tradition that may be of 
interest here. In Islam, long before nihilism, the initiatic Order of the 
Ismaelis used the very phrase "Nothing exists, everything is permit- 
ted," 7 But it applied in this order exclusively to the upper grades of the 
hierarchy. Before attaining these grades and having the right to adopt 
this truth for oneself, one had to pass four preliminary grades that 
involved, among othefthings, a rule of unconditional, blind obedience, 
taken to limits that are almost inconceivable for the Western mentality. 
For example, at a word from the Grand Master one had to be prepared 
to throw one's life away without any reason or purpose. 

This brings us to the consideration of the second degree of the trial 
through self-knowledge, which belongs to the transcendent dimen- 
sion and which conditions the final solution of the existential prob- 
lem. With the first degree, in fact, with the recognition of "one's own 
nature" and the making of one's own law, this problem is only resolved 
partially, on the formal plane. That is the plane of determination, or, if 
one prefers, individuation, which furnishes one with an adequate base 
for controlling one's conduct in any circumstances. But this plane has 
no transparency for one who wants to get to the bottom of things; 
absolute meaning is not yet to be found therein. When the situation 
remains at this stage, one is active in wanting to be oneself, but not 
with regard to the fact of being thus and not otherwise. To a certain 
type, this can seem like something so irrational and obscure as to set in 
motion a crisis that endangers everything he has gained hitherto along 
the lines indicated. It is then that he must undergo the second degree of 
self-proving, which is like an experimental proof of the presence within 
him, in greater or lesser measure, of the higher dimension of transcen- 
dence. This is the unconditioned nucleus that in life does not belong to 
life's sphere, but to that of Being. 

It depends on this last trial to resolve, or not to resolve, the problem 



Invulnerability 63 

of the ultimate meaning of existence in an ambience lacking any support 
or "sign." After the whole superstructure has been rejected or destroyed, 
and having for one's sole support one's own being, the ultimate meaning 
of existing and living can spring only from a direct and absolute rela- 
tionship between that being (between what one is in a limiting sense) 
and transcendence (transcendence in itself). This meaning is not given 
by anything extrinsic or external, anything added to the being when the 
latter turns to some other principle. That might have occurred in a dif- 
ferent world, a traditionally ordered world. But in the existential realm 
under consideration, such a meaning can only be given by the transcen- 
dent dimension directly perceived by man as the root of his being and 
of his "own nature." Moreover, it carries an absolute justification, an 
indelible and irrevocable consecration, which completely destroys the 
state of negativity and the existential problem. On this basis alone does 
"being what one is" cease to constitute a limitation. Otherwise every 
path will be limited, including that of "supermen" and any other kind 
of being that serves with its outward traits to deflect the problem of ulti- 
mate meaning, thereby hiding its own essential vulnerability. 

This unity with the transcendent is also the condition for prevent- 
ing the process of self-unification from taking a regressive path. There 
is in fact a possibility of a pathological unification of the being from 
below, as in the case of an elementary passion that takes over the whole 
person, organizing all his faculties to its own ends. Cases of fanaticism 
and possession are no different in kind. One must consider this pos- 
sible reduction to absurdity of "being oneself" and of the unity of the 
self. This is a further reason to require our particular type of man to 
undergo the trial of self-knowledge at the second degree, which con- 
cerns, as we have said, the presence of the unconditioned and the supra- 
individual as his true center. 

It is easy to see how this requires one to surpass and prove oneself, 
beyond one's own nature and one's own law. The autonomy of him 
who makes his own will coincide with his own being is not enough. 
Moreover, it requires a rupture of levels that can sometimes have the 
character of violence done to oneself, and one has to be sure to remain 
on one's feet even in the void and the formless. This is positive anomie, 
beyond autonomy. In less qualified types, in those in which the original 



64 In the World Where God Is Dead 

inheritance, as I called it, is not sufficiently alive existentially, this trial 
almost always requires a certain "sacrificial" disposition: such a man 
has to feel ready to be destroyed, if need be, without being hurt thereby. 
The result of trials or experiences of this kind remains undetermined, 
and has always been so, even when the ultimate consecration of inner 
sovereignty was sought within the institutional frameworks provided 
by Tradition. It is all the more so in today's social climate, in circum- 
stances where it is almost impossible to create a magical circle of pro- 
tection in this confrontation with transcendence, with that which is in 
fact not human. 

But we repeat: In a meaningless world, the absolute sense of being 
depends almost exclusively on this experience. If it has a positive out- 
come, the last limit falls^away; transcendence and existence, freedom 
and necessity, possibility and reality coincide. A centrality and invul- 
nerability are realized without restriction in any situation, be it dark or 
light, detached or apparently open to every impulse or passion of life. 
Above all, the essential conditions are thereby created for adapting, 
without losing oneself, to a world that has become free but left to its 
own devices, seized by irrationality and meaninglessness. And this is 
exactly the problem with which we began. 

Having established this basic point regarding the ultimate clarifi- 
cation of oneself, I turn now to some special aspects of the integrated 
man's orientation within current experience. 

If we follow the method used up to now and take some of Nietzsche's 
categories as our provisional reference point, we might immediately 
relate this to "Dionysism." But in fact, the philosopher of the superman 
has given this term differing and contradictory meanings. One of the 
signs of his incomprehension of ancient traditions is his interpretation of 
the symbols of Dionysus and Apollo on the basis of a modern philoso- 
phy like Schopenhauer's. As I have already pointed out, he uses the term 
"Dionysus" for a sort of divinized immanence, an intoxicated and fre- 
netic affirmation of life in its most irrational and tragic aspects. On the 
other hand, Nietzsche makes Apollo into the symbol of a contemplation 
of the world of pure forms, as though taking flight to free oneself from 
the sensations and tensions of this irrational and dramatic substratum of 
existence. All of this is without foundation. 



Invulnerability 65 

Without entering into the special field of the history of religions and 
ancient civilization, I will limit myself to recalling that the Dionysian 
way was a way of the Mysteries, apart from a few decayed and spuri- 
ous popular forms. Just like other Mysteries that correspond to it in 
other cultural areas, it can be defined in the terms already used: an 
experience of life raised to a particular intensity that emerges, over- 
turns, and frees itself in something more than life, thanks to an onto- 
logical rupture of levels. But this conclusion, which is equivalent to the 
realization, revival, or reawakening of transcendence in oneself, can 
equally well be referred to the true content of the symbol of Apollo; 
hence the absurdity of Nietzsche's antithesis between "Apollo" and 
"Dionysus." 

This serves as a preliminary to our real intention, which can only 
concern a "Dionysism" that is integrated, as one might say, with 
Apollonism. Here one possesses the stability that is the result of the 
Dionysian experience not as a goal before oneself, but in a certain sense 
behind oneself. Or else we can speak of a "Dionysian Apollonism," and 
define in these terms one of the most important ingredients of the atti- 
tude of the modern human type in his encounter with existence, beyond 
the special domain of his trials. 

Naturally, we are not dealing here with normal existence, but with 
those possible forms of it that are already differentiated, that have a 
certain intensity, while still being defined in a chaotic ambience, in the 
domain of pure contingency. They are not infrequent today, and in the 
times to come they will surely proliferate. The state in question is that 
of the man who is self-confident through having as the essential cen- 
ter of his personality not life, but Being. He can encounter everything, 
abandon himself to everything, and open himself to everything without 
losing himself. He accepts every experience, no longer in order to prove 
and know himself, but to unfold all his possibilities in view of the trans- 
formations that they can work in him, and of the new contents that 
offer and reveal themselves on this path. 

Nietzsche often spoke in similar terms of the "Dionysian soul," 
albeit with his usual dangerous confusions. It was for him "the soul 
that, having being, plunges into becoming" 8 ; that which can run 
beyond itself, almost fleeing from itself, and find itself in a vaster 



66 In the World Where God Is Dead 

sphere; the soul that feels the need and joy of adventuring in the world 
of chance or even the irrational. In the process, "by transfiguring itself, 
it transfigures existence" 9 : existence here to be taken in all its aspects, 
just as it is, "without withdrawal, exception, or choice." 10 The domain 
of the senses is not excluded, but included. The Dionysian state "is the 
state in which the spirit rediscovers itself right down to the senses, while 
the senses rediscover themselves in the spirit." 11 This concerns superior 
types in which even experiences largely tied to the senses "end by turn- 
ing into the image and inebriation of the highest spirituality." 12 

One could show many correspondences between the latter point 
and the doctrines, paths, and very elaborate practices of the world of 
Tradition. 13 One of the aspects of Dionysism in the broad sense can 
in fact be seen in its capacity to overcome the antithesis of spirit and 
senses, an antithesis typical of the previous Western religious morality 
that is now in crisis. That which enables this antithesis to be overcome 
is the other quality, introduced into the sense domain to transform its 
motive force as it were catalytically. 

Moreover, the capacity to open oneself without losing oneself takes 
on a special importance in an epoch of dissolution. It is the way to 
master every transformation that may occur, even the most perilous 
ones. A passage in the Upanishads marks its extreme limit, speaking 
of him against whom death is powerless, because it has become part of 
his being. 14 In this state, outside events that might affect or upset his 
being can become the stimulus that activates an ever greater freedom 
and potential. The transcendent dimension, which holds firm through 
all turns of the tide, all ups and downs, will also play the part here of 
a transformer. It prevents any intoxicated self-identification with the 
life force, not to mention what might be induced by a thirst for life, 
or by the disorderly impulse to seek in mere sensation a surrogate for 
the meaning of existence, and to lose oneself in actions and "achieve- 
ments." Detachment coexists with a fully lived experience; a calm 
"being" is constantly wedded to the substance of life. The consequence 
of this union, existentially speaking, is a most particular kind of lucid 
inebriation, one might almost say intellectualized and magnetic, which 
is the absolute opposite of what comes from the ecstatic opening to the 
world of elementary forces, instinct, and "nature," In this very special 



Invulnerability 67 

inebriation, subtilized and clarified, is to be seen the vital element nec- 
essary for an existence in the free state, in a chaotic world abandoned 
to itself 

Later on, I may have occasion to enter into more detail about this 
inebriation. The important point here is to grasp the essential opposition 
between this state and attitudes that have taken shape in the modern 
world alongside the rebellion against rationalism or puritanism. It often 
calls itself a new "paganism" and follows a path like that of Nietzsche's 
worst "Dionysism" ("exuberance, innocence, plenitude, the joy of life/' 
the agape, ecstasy, eros, cruelty, intoxication, springtime, 15 "a whole 
scale of lights and colors going from semidivine forms, in a sort of 
divinification of the body, to those of a healthy semi-animality and 
the simple pleasures of uncorrupted natures" 16 — as he wrote with par- 
ticular reference to the ancient world). We have noticed a similar spirit 
pervading much of the modern cult of action, despite the mechanical 
and abstract traits often present in it. But the perspective that interests 
us here is one of clarity and presence of mind in every encounter and 
evocation, and a calm that coexists with movement and transforma- 
tions. It imparts stability to every step of the way, and a continuity that 
is also that of invulnerability and an invisible sovereignty. 

This also demands a kind of freedom from the past and the future, 
the intrepidity of a soul free from the bonds of the lesser I, the "being" 
that manifests itself in the form of "being in action." The naturalness 
required by this mode of being prevents i^s from using the term "hero- 
ism" to describe some of its incidental features, for there is nothing in 
it of the pathos, romanticism, individualism, rhetoric, and even exhi- 
bitionism that nearly always accompany the current idea of heroism. 
And we hardly need underline the difference between this use of the 
word "act" and a certain empty academic philosophy, an outmoded 
neo-Hegelianism that took the concept as its center. 17 



11 

Acting without Desire 
The Causal Law 



I now address a particular aspect of the attitude in question, applicable 
to a wider and less exclusive field: that of life seen as the field of works, 
activities, and achievementsun which the individual deliberately takes 
the initiative* We are not dealing now with simple, lived experiences, 
but with procedures aimed at a goal. The character of the human type I 
have been describing must result in a certain orientation whose essence 
was defined in the traditional world by two basic maxims. 

The first of these is to act without regard to the fruits, without being 
affected by the chances of success or failure, victory or defeat, winning 
or losing, any more than by pleasure or pain, or by the approval or 
disapproval of others. This form of action has also been called "action 
without desire." The higher dimension, which is presumed to be present 
in oneself, manifests through the capacity to act not with less, but with 
more application than a normal type of man could bring to the ordi- 
nary forms of conditioned action. One can also speak here of "doing 
what needs to be done," impersonally. 

The necessary coexistence of the two principles is even more dis- 
tinct in the second traditional maxim, which is that of "action without 
acting." It is a paradoxical, Far Eastern way of describing a form of 
action that does not involve or stir the higher principle of "being" in 
itself. Yet the latter remains the true subject of the action, giving it its 
primary motive force and sustaining and guiding it from beginning to 
end. 1 

Such a line of conduct obviously refers to the domain in which one's 
own nature is allowed to function, and to that which derives from the 
particular situation that one has actively assumed as an individual. This 



68 



Acting without Desire 69 

is the very context in which the maxims of "acting without regard to 
the fruits" and of "doing what needs to be done" apply. The content of 
such action is not what is given by initiatives that arise from the void of 
pure freedom; it is what is defined by one's own natural inner law. 

Whereas the Dionysian attitude mainly concerns the receptive side 
of the testing and confirmation of oneself while in the midst of becom- 
ing, and perhaps when facing the unexpected, the irrational, and the 
problematic, the orientation of which I have been speaking concerns 
the active side, in the specific and, in a way, external sense of personal 
behavior and expression. Another saying from the world of Tradition 
may apply here: "Be whole in the broken, straight in the bent." 2 I have 
already alluded to it when evoking a whole category of actions that are 
really peripheral and "passive," which do not engage the essence but 
are automatic reflexes, unreflecting reactions of the sensibility. Even 
the supposed plenitude of pure "living," which is largely biologically 
conditioned, does not belong to a much higher plane. Very different 
is the action that arises from the deep and in a way supra-individual 
core of being, in the form of "being inasmuch as one acts." Whatever 
their object, one is involved in these actions. Their quality never varies, 
divides, or multiplies: they are a pure expression of the self, whether 
in the humblest work of an artisan or in precise mechanical work, in 
action taken in situations of danger, of command, or of controlling 
powerful material or social forces. Charles Peguy was only stating a 
principle of broad application in the world of Tradition when he said 
that a work well done is a reward in itself, and that the true artisan puts 
the same care into a work to be seen, and into one that remains unseen. 
I will return to this theme in a later chapter. 

A particular point that deserves to be highlighted concerns the real 
significance of the idea that neither pleasure nor pain should enter as 
motives when one must do what must be done. It might easily make 
one think along the lines of a "moral stoicism," with all the aridity 
and soullessness inherent in that concept. In fact, it will be difficult for 
someone who is acting from a basis in "life" and not from "being" to 
imagine the possibility of this kind of orientation, in which one obeys 
no abstract rule, no "duty" superimposed on the natural impulse of 
the individual, because his impulse would instead be to seek pleasure 



70 In the World Where God Is Dead 

and avoid pain. This, however, is a commonplace derived from the 
false generalization of what only applies to certain situations, where 
pleasure and pain are rightly viewed as detached ideas, which a pre- 
liminary rational consideration transforms into goals and motives of 
action. Situations of this kind are rarer than one might think in any 
"sane" nature (and the expression rightly applies here); there are many 
cases in which the starting point is not a reflection, but a vital motion 
that resonates as pleasure or pain as it develops. One can in fact speak 
of a vital "decadence" when values of hedonism and comfort take first 
place in one's conduct of life. It implies a splitting and a loss of soul 
that are analogous to the form sexual pleasure takes for depraved and 
vicious types. In them, what otherwise arises naturally from the motion 
of eros and concludes with the possession and embrace of the woman 
becomes a separate end, to which the rest serves as a means. 

In any case, the important thing is to make the distinction, well 
known to traditional teachings, between the happiness or pleasure that 
is ardent, and that which is heroic — using the latter term with due res- 
ervation. The distinction corresponds to that between two opposite 
attitudes and two opposite human types. The first type of happiness 
or pleasure belongs to the naturalistic plane and is marked by passiv- 
ity toward the world of impulses, instincts, passions, and inclinations. 
Tradition defines the basis of naturalistic existence as desire and thirst, 
and ardent pleasure is that which is tied to the satisfaction of desire in 
terms of a momentary dampening of the fire that drives life onward. 
Heroic pleasure, on the other hand, is that which accompanies a deci- 
sive action that comes from "being," from the plane superior to that of 
life, and in a way it blends with the special inebriation that was men- 
tioned earlier. 

The pleasure and pain that are not to be taken account of, accord- 
ing to the rules of pure action, are those of the first type, the natu- 
ralistic. Pure action involves the other kind of pleasure or happiness, 
which it would be wrong to imagine as inhabiting an arid, abstracted, 
and soulless climate. There, too, there can be fire and vigor, but of 
a very special kind, with the constant presence and transparency of 
the higher, calm, and detached principle — which, as I have said, is the 
true acting principle here. It is also important in this context not to 



Acting without Desire 71 

confuse the form of action (that is, its inner significance, the mode of 
its validity for the I) with its content. There is no object of ardent or 
passive pleasure that cannot in principle be also the object of heroic or 
positive pleasure, and vice versa. It is a matter of a different dimension, 
which includes everything but which also includes possibilities that fall 
outside the realm of natural, conditioned existence. In practice, there 
are many cases in which this is true and possible on the sole condition 
of this qualitative change, this transmutation of the sensible into the 
hypersensible, in which we have just seen one of the principal aspects of 
the orientation of an integrated and rectified Dionysism. 

Finally there is an analogy between positive or heroic pleasure and 
that which, even on the empirical plane, accompanies any action in 
its perfection, when its style shows a greater or lesser degree of dili- 
gence and integrity. Everyone has experienced the particular pleasure 
obtained from the exercise of an acquired skill, when after the neces- 
sary efforts to develop it (without being driven by the idea of "ardent 
pleasure") it becomes an ability, a spontaneity of a higher order, a mas- 
tery, a sort of game. Thus all the elements considered in this paragraph 
complement each other. 

There are some further observations to be made in a more external 
field: that of the interactions to which the individual is exposed, even 
if he is integrated in our sense, by virtue of being placed in a specific 
society, a civilization, and a cosmic environment. 

Pure action does not mean blind action. The rule is to care nothing 
for the consequences to the shifting, individualistic feelings, but not in 
ignorance of the objective conditions that action must take into account 
in order to be as perfect as possible, and so as not to be doomed to fail- 
ure from the start. One may not succeed: that is secondary, but it should 
not be owing to defective knowledge of. everything concerning the con- 
ditions of efficacy, which generally comprise causality, the relations of 
cause to effect, and the law of concordant actions and reactions. 

One can extend these ideas to help define the attitude that the inte- 
grated man should adopt on every plane, once he has done away with 
the current notions of good and evil. He sets himself above the moral 
plane not with pathos and polemics but with objectivity, hence through 
knowledge — the knowledge of causes and effects — and through conduct 



72 In the World Where God Is Dead 

that has this knowledge as its only basis* Thus for the moral concept 
of "sin" he substitutes the objective one of "fault," or more precisely 
"error." 3 For him who has centered himself in transcendence, the idea 
of "sin" has no more sense than the current and vacillating notions of 
good and evil, licit and illicit. All these notions are burnt out of him 
and cannot spiritually germinate again. One might say that they have 
been divested of their absolute value, and are tested objectively on the 
basis of the consequences that in fact follow from an action inwardly 
free from them. 

There is an exact correspondence with traditional teachings here, 
just as there was in the other behavioral elements suggested for an epoch 
of dissolution. To name a well-known formula that is nearly always mis- 
understood, thanks to overblown moralizing, there is the so-called law 
of karma. 4 It concerns the effects that happen on all planes as the result 
of given actions, because these actions already contain their causes in 
potentiality: effects that are natural and neutral, devoid of moral sanc- 
tion either positive or negative. It is an extension of the laws that are 
nowadays considered appropriate for physical phenomena, laws that 
contain no innate obligation concerning the conduct that should fol- 
low once one knows about them. As far as "evil" is concerned, there is 
an old Spanish proverb that expresses this idea: "God said: take what 
you want and pay the price"; also the Koranic saying: "He who does 
evil, does it only to himself." It is a matter of keeping in mind the pos- 
sibility of certain objective reactions, and so long as one accepts them 
even when they are negative, one's action remains free. The determin- 
ism of what the traditional world called "fate," and made the basis 
of various forms of divination and oracles, was conceived in the same 
way: it was a matter of certain objective directions of events, which 
one might or might not take into account in view of the advantage or 
risk inherent in choosing a certain course. By analogy, if someone is 
intending to make a risky alpine climb or a flight, once he has heard 
a forecast of bad weather he may either abandon or pursue it. In the 
latter case, he accepts the risk from the start. But the freedom remains; 
no "moral" factor comes into play. In some cases the "natural sanc- 
tion," the karma, can be partially neutralized. Again by analogy: one 
may know in advance that a certain conduct of life will probably cause 



Acting without Desire 73 

harm to the organism. But one may give it no thought and eventually 
resort to medicine to neutralize its effects. Then everything is reduced 
to an interplay of various reactions, and the ultimate effect will depend 
on the strongest one. The same perspective and behavior are also valid 
on the nonmaterial plane. 

If we assume that the being has reached a high grade of unification, 
everything resembling an "inner sanction" can be interpreted in the 
same terms — positive feelings will arise in the case of one line of action, 
negative in the case of an opposite line, thus conforming to "good" 
or "evil" according to their meanings in a certain society, a certain 
social stratum, a certain civilization, and a certain epoch. Apart from 
purely external and social reactions, a man may suffer, feel remorse, 
guilt, or shame when he acts contrary to the tendency that still prevails 
in his depths (for the ordinary man, nearly always through hereditary 
and social conditioning active in his subconscious), and which has only 
apparently been silenced by other tendencies and by the dictate of the 
"physical I." On the other hand, he feels a sense of satisfaction and 
comfort when he obeys that tendency. In the end, the negative "inner 
sanction" may intervene to cause a breakdown in the case mentioned, 
where he starts from what he knows to be his deepest and most authen- 
tic vocation and chooses a given ideal and line of conduct, but then 
gives way to other pressures and passively recognizes his own weakness 
and failure, suffering the internal dissociation due to the uncoordinated 
plurality of tendencies. 

These emotional reactions are purely psychological in character and 
origin. They may be indifferent to the intrinsic quality of the actions, 
and they have no transcendent significance, no character of "moral 
sanctions." They are facts that are "natural" in their own way, on which 
one should not superimpose a mythology of moral interpretations if 
one has arrived at true inner freedom. These are the objective terms 
in which Guyau, Nietzsche, and others have treated in realistic terms 
such phenomena of the "moral conscience," on which various authors 
have tried to build a kind of experimental basis — moving illegitimately 
from the plane of psychological facts to that of pure values — for an 
ethics that is not overtly founded on religious commandments. This 
aspect disappears automatically when the being has become one and 



74 In the World Where God Is Dead 

his actions spring from that unity. In order to eliminate anything imply- 
ing limitation or support I would rephrase that: when the being has 
become one through willing it, having chosen unity; because a choice 
is implied even here, whose direction is not obligatory. One might even 
accept and will nonunity, and in the same class of superior types that 
we are concerned with here, there may be those who permit themselves 
to do so. In such a case their basal unity does not cease to exist, but 
rather dematerializes and remains invisibly on a deeper plane. 

Incidentally, in the same tradition to which the doctrine of karma 
belongs there is the possibility not only of eliminating the emotive 
reactions mentioned above (through "impeccability," inner neutrality 
toward good and evil), but also of the "magical" neutralization of kar- 
mic reactions in the case of a being who has really burnt out his natu- 
ralistic part, and thereby become actively de-individualized. 

This partial digression may serve to clarify how the "moral" 
plane can be eliminated impersonally, without any pathos, through 
considering the law of cause and effect in its fullest extension. Earlier 
on, I examined the field of external actions in which this law must 
be taken into account. In the inner realm it is a question of knowing 
what "blows to one's own self" may result from certain behaviors, 
and of acting accordingly, with the same objectivity. The "sin" com- 
plex is a pathological formation born under the sign of the personal 
God, the "God of morality." The more metaphysical traditions, on the 
other hand, are characterized by consciousness of an error committed, 
rather than by the sense of sin; and this is a theme that the superior 
man of our own time should make his own, beyond the dissolution of 
religious residues, by following the course I have described. An addi- 
tional clarification comes from these observations of Frithjof Schuon: 
"The Hindus and Far Easterners do not have the notion of 'sin' in the 
Semitic sense; they distinguish actions not according to their intrin- 
sic value but according to their opportuneness in view of cosmic or 
spiritual reactions, and also of social utility; they do not distinguish 
between 'moral' and 'immoral,' but between advantageous and harm- 
ful, pleasant and unpleasant, normal and abnormal, to the point of 
sacrificing the former — but apart from any ethical classification — to 
spiritual interests. They may push renunciation, abnegation, and mor- 



Acting without Desire 75 

tification to the limits of what is humanly possible, but without being 
'moralists' for all that." 5 

With that we can conclude the principal part of our investigation. 
To sum up, the man for whom the new freedom does not spell ruin, 
whether because, given his special structure, he already has a firm base 
in himself, or because he is in the process of conquering it through an 
existential rupture of levels that reestablishes contact with the higher 
dimension of "being" — this man will possess a vision of reality stripped 
of the human and moral element, free from the projections of subjectiv- 
ity and from conceptual, finalistic, and theistic superstructures. This 
reduction to pure reality of the general view of the world and of exis- 
tence will be described in what follows. Its counterpart is the return of 
the person himself to pure being: the freedom of pure existence in the 
outside world is confirmed in the naked assumption of his own nature, 
from which he draws his own rule. This rule is a law to him to the 
degree that he does not start from a state of unity, and to the degree 
that secondary, divergent tendencies coexist and external factors try to 
influence him. 

In the practical field of action, we have considered a regime of 
experiments with two degrees and two ends. First there is the proving 
knowledge of himself as a determined being, then of himself as a being 
in whom the transcendent dimension is positively present. The latter is 
the ultimate basis of his own law, and its supreme justification. After 
everything has collapsed and in a climate of dissolution, there is only 
one solution to the problem of an unconditioned and intangible mean- 
ing to life: the direct assumption of one's own naked being as a function 
of transcendence. 

As for the modes of behavior toward the world, once a clarifica- 
tion and confirmation of oneself has been achieved as described, the 
general formula is indicated by an intrepid openness, devoid of ties but 
united in detachment, in the face of any possible experience. Where 
this involves a high intensity of life and a regime of achievement that 
enliven and nourish the calm principle of transcendence within, the 
orientation has some features in common with Nietzsche's "Dionysian 
state"; but the way in which this state should be integrated suggests that 



76 In the World Where God Is Dead 

a better term would be "Dionysian Apollonism." When one's relations 
with the world are not those of lived experience in general, but of the 
manifestation of oneself through works and active initiatives, the style 
suggested is that of involvement in every act, of pure and impersonal 
action, "without desire," without attachment. 

Attention was also drawn to a special state of lucid inebriation that 
is connected with this entire orientation and is absolutely essential for 
the type of man under consideration, because it takes the place of that 
animation that, given a different world, he would receive from an envi- 
ronment formed by Tradition, thus filled with meaning; or else from the 
subintellectual adhesion to emotion and impulses at the vital base of 
existence, in pure bios. Finally, I devoted some attention to the reality 
of actions and the regime of knowledge that should take the place of the 
mythology of inner moral sanctions and of "sin/' 

Those who know my other works will be aware of the correspon- 
dence between these views and certain instructions of schools and 
movements in the world of Tradition, which almost always concerned 
only the esoteric doctrine* I repeat here what I have said already: that 
it is only for incidental and opportune reasons that I have taken into 
consideration themes from modern thinkers, especially Nietzsche. They 
serve to create a link with the problems that preoccupy Europeans who 
have already witnessed the arrival of nihilism and of the world without 
God, and have sought to go beyond these in a positive way. It must 
be emphasized that such references could have been dispensed with 
altogether. With the intention of creating a similar link to what some 
contemporary thinkers have presented in a more or less muddled way, 
it seems useful to treat briefly that contemporary current known as 
existentialism, before proceeding to some particular sectors of today's 
culture and lifestyles, and to the proper attitude to take toward them. 



Part 3 



The Dead End of 
Existentialism 



12 

Being and 
Inauthentic Existence 



It is well known that there are two different types of existentialism. 
The first belongs to a group of philosophers by trade, whose ideas 
until recently were unknown outside their narrow intellectual circles. 
Second, there is a practical existentialism that came into vogue after 
World War II with groups that borrowed a few themes from the philo- 
sophical existentialists. They adapted them for literary purposes or 
as grounds for anticonformist, pseudo-anarchist, or rebellious behav- 
ior, as in the well-known case of yesterday's existentialists of Saint- 
Germain-des-Pres and other Parisian locales, inspired above all by 
Jean-Paul Sartre. 

Both types of existentialism have value essentially as signs of the 
times. The second type, for all its forced and snobbish nature, still has 
this value no less than the "serious," philosophical existentialism. In 
fact, the practical existentialists are presented, or present themselves, 
as a variety of that "generation at risk," victims of the final crisis of the 
modern world. Thus they may actually find themselves at an advantage 
over the philosophical existentialists, who are mostly professors, and 
whose academic table talk certainly reflects some motifs of the crisis of 
contemporary man, but whose lifestyle has remained petit bourgeois, 
far from the practical, personal, anticonformist conduct that the second 
existentialist current displays. 

Nevertheless, it is the philosophical existentialism that concerns us 
here. Let it be understood that I certainly do not intend to discuss its 
positions "philosophically," to see if they are speculatively "true" or 
"false." Apart from the fact that this would require a much longer treat- 
ment than I can give it here, it would be of no interest for our purposes. 



78 



Being and Inauthentic Existence 79 

I will examine instead a few of the more typical motives of existential- 
ism in terms of their symbolic and, indeed, "existential" significance, 
that is, as indirect testimonies on the abstract and discursive level of the 
sensation of existence belonging to a certain human type of our time. 
Moreover, this examination is necessary for drawing the line between 
the positions defined so far and the existentialists 5 ideas, which is all the 
more important since my usage of a certain terminology could give rise 
to the mistaken idea of nonexistent affinities. 

Apart from their systematizing and their more elaborate philosoph- 
ical apparatus, the philosophical existentialists' situation is analogous 
to Nietzsche's: they too are modern men, that is, men severed from 
the world of Tradition and devoid of any knowledge or comprehension 
of that world. They work with the categories of "Western thought," 
which is as much as to say profane, abstract, and rootless. Noteworthy 
is the case of Karl Jaspers, perhaps the only one among the existential- 
ists to make a few superficial references to "metaphysics," 1 confused 
by him with mysticism; at the same time he exalts "rational illumi- 
nation," "the liberty and independence of the philosophical," and is 
intolerant of any form of spiritual and secular authority, and of any 
claim to obedience for men "believed to be God's microphones" — as 
if nothing else were imaginable. 2 These are the typical horizons of the 
intellectual of liberal-bourgeois origin. I, on the contrary, even though I 
have considered and will be considering modern problems, will not use 
modern categories to clarify or dismiss them. Moreover, even when the 
existentialists partially follow the right path, it happens as if by chance, 
not based on sound principles but with inevitable waverings, omissions, 
and confusions, and above all in a state of internal surrender. Worse 
yet, philosophical existentialists use an arbitrary terminology that they 
have specially invented, and which, especially in Heidegger, is of an 
inconceivable abstruseness, both superfluous and intolerable. 

The first point to be emphasized in existentialism is the affirmation 
of the "ontic-ontological" primacy of that concrete and irreplicable being 
that we always are. This is also expressed by saying that "existence pre- 
cedes essence." The "essence" here is equivalent to everything that can 
be judgment, value, and name. As for existence, it is immediately related 
to the "situation" in which every individual locates himself concretely in 



80 The Dead End of Existentialism 

space, time, and history. The expression used by Heidegger for this ele- 
mentary reality is "being-there" or "being-here" (Da-sein). 3 He connects 
it closely to "being-in-the-world," to the extent of seeing it as an essential 
constituent element of the human being. To recognize the conditionality 
imposed by the "situation" in the treatment of every problem and the 
vision of the world is necessary, he says, in order not to fall into mystifica- 
tion and self-deception. 

Whatever value they may have, the consequences of this first basic 
existentialist motif add little to what we have already established 
regarding the affirmation of one's own nature and one's own law, and 
regarding the rejection of all doctrines and norms that claim universal, 
abstract, and normative validity. Obviously it confirms the direction in 
which to seek the onlysupport in a climate of dissolution. Jaspers, espe- 
cially, brings to light the fact that every "objective" consideration, when 
detached from the context of the problems and visions of the world, 
leads inevitably to relativism, skepticism, and ultimately to nihilism. 
The only viable path is that of an "elucidation" (Erhellung) of the ideas 
and principles on the basis of their existential foundation, or of the truth 
of the "being" that each one is. It is like enclosing oneself in a circle. 
Heidegger, however, says of this, and not unjustly, that the important 
thing is not to leave the circle, but to remain there in the right way. 

The relation between this orientation and an environment by 
now devoid of meaning is given by the existential opposition between 
authenticity and inauthenticity. Heidegger speaks of the state of inau- 
thenticity, of swooning, of "covering" oneself or fleeing from oneself to 
find oneself, of "being flung" 4 into the anodyne existence of everyday 
life with its platitudes, chattering, lies, entanglements, expedients, its 
forms of "tranquilization" and "dejection," and its escapist diversions. 5 
Authentic existence is seen and sought when one senses the emptiness 
underlying that existence and is recalled to the problem of one's own 
deepest being, beyond the social I and its categories. Here we have a 
recapitulation of all the critiques that conclude by showing the absur- 
dity and insignificance of modern life. 

The affinity of these ideas with the positions already defined here 
is, however, relative, because existentialism is characterized by an unac- 
ceptable overvaluation of "situationality." "Dasein" for Heidegger is 



Being and Inauthentic Existence 81 

always "being~in-the~world." 6 The destiny of the "boundary situation" 7 
is, for Jaspers as well as for Marcel, a liminal fact, a given in the face 
of which thinking halts and crashes. Heidegger repeats that the charac- 
teristic of "being-in-the-world" is not accidental for the Self: it is not as 
though the latter could exist without it, it is not that man firstly is, and 
then has a relation with the world — a causal, occasional, and arbitrary 
relationship with that which is. All this might well be the case, but 
only for a human type different from that which concerns us. As we 
know, in this human type an inner detachment, albeit coupled with an 
absolute assumption of his determined nature, limits any "situational 5 * 
conditions and, from a superior point of view, minimizes and relegates 
to contingency any "being-in-the-world." 

There is an evident incongruence in the existentialists, since at the 
same time they generally consider a rupture of that "enclosure" of the 
individual, and an overcoming of that simple immanence, which, as we 
have seen, gravely prejudice the positions of Nietzsche. Already in Soren 
Kierkegaard, considered as the spiritual father of the existentialists, 
"existence" is presented as a problem; with a special use of the German 
term Existenz, different from current usage, he defines Existenz as a 
paradoxical point in which the finite and the infinite, the temporal and 
the eternal, are copresent, meeting but mutually excluding each other. 
So it would seem to be a matter of recognizing the presence in man of 
the transcendent dimension. (Following the abstract habit of philoso- 
phy, the existentialists too speak of man in ggieral, whereas one should 
always refer to one or another human type.) Still, we can accept the 
conception of Existenz as the physical presence of the I in the world, 
in a determined, concrete, and unrepeatable form and situation (c£ the 
theory of one's own nature and law in chapter 7) and, simultaneously, as 
a metaphysical presence of Being (of transcendence) in the I. 

Along these lines, a certain type of existentialism could also lead to 
another point already established here: that of a positive antitheism, an 
existential overcoming of the God-figure, the object of faith or doubt. 
Since the center of the I is also mysteriously the center of Being, "God" 
(transcendence) is a certainty, not as a subject of faith or dogma, but 
as presence in existence and freedom. The saying of Jaspers: "God is a 
certainty for me inasmuch as I exist authentically," 8 relates in a certain 



82 The Dead End of Existentialism 

way to the state already indicated, in which calling Being into question 
would amount to calling oneself into question. 

From this first dissection of existentialist ideas we can reckon on 
the positive side its highlighting of the dual structure of a given human 
type (not of man in general) and the piercing of the plane of "life" to 
admit a higher type of presence. But we shall see the problem that all 
this entails, and that existentialism does not resolve. 



13 

Sartre: 
Prisoner without Walls 



Of all the existentialists, Sartre is perhaps the one who has most empha- 
sized "existential freedom." His theory essentially reflects the movement 
toward detachment that has led to the nihilistic world. Sartre speaks of 
the nihilating (neantisant) act of the human being, which expresses his 
freedom and constitutes the essence and the ultimate meaning of every 
motion directed at a goal, and, in the final instance, of his whole exis- 
tence in time. The speculative "justification" of such an idea is that "in 
order to act it is necessary to abandon the plane of being and resolutely 
attack that of nonbeing," because every goal corresponds to a situa- 
tion not yet in existence, hence to a nothingness, to the empty space of 
that which is mere possibility. Freedom in action introduces, then, the 
"nothingness" into the world: "the human being first rests in the bosom 
of being, then detaches himself from it with annihilating recoil" (recul 
neantisant). This occurs not only when freedom calls being into ques- 
tion by doubting, interrogating, seeking out, and destroying it, but also 
in any desire, emotion, or passion, without any exception. Freedom is 
then presented to us as "a nihilating rupture with the world and with 
oneself," as pure negation of the given: not being that which is, but being 
that which is not. 1 Through repetition, this process of rupture and tran- 
scendence that leaves nothing behind itself and goes forward toward 
nothing, gives rise to the development of existence in time (to "tem- 
poralization,") Sartre says precisely: "Freedom, choice, nihilation, and 
temporalization are one and the same thing." 2 

This view is shared by other existentialists, especially by Heidegger, 



83 



84 The Dead End of Existentialism 

when he locates in "transcendence" the essence, the fundamental struc- 
ture of the subject, the self, the ipseity, or whatever else one wants to call 
"the entity that we always are." But it is Sartre who is responsible for 
relating such views to their "existential" underpinning, made from the 
specific experience of the last man who, having burned every support or 
bond, finds himself consigned to himself. 

Sartre employs every subtle argument to demonstrate "objectively" 
that the final ground of any human action is absolute freedom, that 
there is no situation in which man is not compelled to choose, having no 
other basis in his choice outside of himself. Thus Sartre points out that 
even not choosing is a choice, so that basically the act of volition entails 
no more freedom than the impassioned act, than surrendering oneself, 
obeying, or giving way t5 instinct. Referring to "nature," "physiology," 
"history," and so on, is not a valid excuse, because according to the 
given terms one's own fundamental freedom and one's own responsi- 
bility still subsist. Thus what in Nietzsche was an imperative — that the 
superior man should know nothing to which to consign his responsibil- 
ity and sensation of living — is here posited as a given fact proven by 
philosophical analysis. But Sartre's state of mind is very different. For 
him, man is like someone in a prison without walls; he cannot find, 
either in himself or outside himself, any refuge from his freedom; he is 
destined, is sentenced to be free. He is not free to accept or refuse his 
freedom; he cannot escape it* I have already mentioned this state of the 
mind as the most characteristic evidence of the specific, negative sense 
that freedom has assumed in a certain human type in the epoch of 
nihilism. Freedom that cannot cease to be such, that cannot choose to 
be or not to be freedom, is for Sartre a limitation, a primordial, insuper- 
able, and distressing "given," 

In his philosophy, everything else, including the outside world, the 
totality of limitations belonging to men, things, or events, is suppos- 
edly never a real constriction; every impotence, every tragedy, even 
death itself, can be assumed, in principle, within freedom. In most 
cases, everything will be reduced to factors that one must still take into 
account, but that are not internally binding (as if following the objective 
line of conduct considered below in chapter 16). Here Sartre has taken 
from Heidegger the concept of "instrumentality" (Zuhandenbeit), of 



Sartre: Prisoner without Walls 85 

the character of "mere usable means" that everything that comes to us 
from the outside, from people and things, may present to us; it always 
presupposes not only my particular structure or formation, but also any 
attitude, goal, or direction selected or accepted by me alone, to which 
the external factors cease to have a neutral character and make them- 
selves known as favorable (usable) or adverse. Any of these characters 
may be inverted to the point at which they change my position, the 
order of my goals and tendencies. Once again, there is no exit from the 
enclosed circle of one's own basic freedom. "[Man] has only done what 
he willed; he has only willed what he has done." 

I will not digress here over the details of Sartre's often paradoxi- 
cal arguments on this subject. It is more interesting to realize that all 
these describe the specific image of the free, "nihilating" man, alone 
with himself. Sartre writes: "We do not have behind or before us the 
luminous realm of values, justifications, or causes." I am abandoned to 
my freedom and responsibility, without refuge in or outside of me, and 
without excuse. 

As for the emotional tone, it amounts to feeling absolute free- 
dom not as a victory, but as a burden. Heidegger even uses the term 
"weight" (Last) to characterize the sensation that one feels, once find- 
ing oneself "hurled" into the world: one is very alive to the sense of 
"being-here" but in the dark as to "whence" and "whither." Moreover, 
the introduction of the concept of responsibility already reveals one of 
the principal flaws of all existentialism: to whom is one responsible? 
A radical "nihilation," when interpreted with regard to our special 
human type as an active manifestation of the dimension of transcen- 
dence, should not tolerate anything that could give the word "respon- 
sibility" such a sense: naturally, we mean a "moral" sense, aside from 
the consequences, external repercussions, either physical or social, 
that can be expected for a given act, internally free. One finds oneself 
already faced with the well-known situation of a freedom that is suf- 
fered, rather than claimed', modern man is not free, but finds himself 
free in the world where God is dead. "He is delivered up to his free- 
dom." It is from this that his deep suffering comes. When he is fully 
aware of this, anguish seizes him and the otherwise absurd sensation 
of a responsibility reappears. 



14 

Existence, "A Project Flung 
into the World" 



We now consider another characteristic and symptomatic theme of 
existentialism: that of the problematical nature of "Dasein." 1 For 
Heidegger, the basis of J)asein is nothingness; one is only flung into 
the world as a mere possibility of being. In existence, for the entity 
that I am, the metaphysical question concerns my own being: I may 
either attain it, or fail to do so. Heidegger's odd definition of what the 
individual represents is "an existent potentiality of being," and also "a 
project flung into the world" (and a mere project is not necessarily real- 
ized). Sartre: "The I which I am depends, in itself, on the I that I have 
not yet become, precisely as the I that I have not yet become depends on 
the I that I am." 2 Here we meet the existential angst, which Heidegger 
rightly distinguishes from fear. Fear arises in the face of the world, due 
to external, physical situations or perils; it would not exist if angst did 
not exist, caused by the feeling of the generally problematic nature of 
one's own being, and by the feeling that one not yet is; that one might 
be, but also might not be. This theory is another witness to the climate 
of modern existence and to a basic traumatization of being. It goes 
without saying that it would be absolutely incomprehensible in an inte- 
grated human type, who is ignorant of angst, hence also of fear. 

In the existentialism that knows no openings on a religious basis, 
a grave but logical consequence of the conception of the Self as a mere 
uncertain possibility of being is the temporality or historicity of exis- 
tence. If I am nothing, if I lack a preexistent metaphysical basis, if I only 
am if that mere project of myself becomes realized, evidently I exist only 
in time, wherein that actuation of my project of being will unfold — or 
not, as the case may be. Thus the eventual process of "transcendence 



86 



v> 



Existence, "A Project Flung into the World" 87 

envisaged by this type of existentialism is purely horizontal, not vertical 
in character. As we shall see, Heidegger speaks of a "horizontal ecstasy 
in the temporal," 3 meaning that the entity of each of us is not tempo- 
ral because it happens to find itself within history, but because it is so 
in its own basic nature: it is able to be solely within time. Given this 
anguished resort to becoming for the source of one's being, and also 
given the recognition of the insignificance of "inauthentic" existence 
in a life that is socialized, superficial, and anodyne, we have evidently 
reached the extreme limit of a true "philosophy of crisis," which we 
could have included among the varieties of modern nihilism. 

Quite obviously, we cannot harvest anything worthwhile from 
these existential themes to bear on the problems and orientation of the 
man who concerns us. Just as we have excluded the intrinsic and fun- 
damental value of "being-in-the-world," we must also exclude, for the 
integrated man, temporality in the limiting sense used up to now. The 
idea of the simple possibility of being, of my being ontologically my 
own project, realizable or otherwise, is only acceptable to us within 
precise limits. What is in question is not "being," but one of its deter- 
mined modalities: recognized, willed, and assumed. Since being in the 
transcendent dimension is not at stake, the sense of one's own problem- 
atic nature is relativized and defused, and one does away with the meta- 
physical angst that the existentialists' man, having a different internal 
constitution, feels, and indeed is bound to feel. 

Turning to another point, existentialism, by introducing the con- 
cept of a "project," finds that it has to admit a nondeducible act that 
took place before individual existence in the world: a mysterious deci- 
sion that has determined the scheme of this existence. Yes, it is only a 
possibility of existence, but it is always determined and incontrovertible 
in the case when it is realized. We can see here how a motif belonging 
to traditional metaphysics, in both East and West (for the latter, see 
Plotinus) has fallen onto most unsuitable soil. Traditional doctrines 
accepted a predetermination that is in a way timeless, precosmic, and 
prenatal, and connected with it the concept of one's "own nature" (the 
Hindu svadharma y the "original face" of Far Eastern philosophy). They 
thereby justified within certain limits the precepts of fidelity to oneself, 
self-election, and responsibility. But on these grounds one can no longer 



88 The Dead End of Existentialism 

hold to the existentialist principle: "existence precedes essence." Essence 
should rightly refer to the preformation that contains potentially that 
which is to be realized in human existence if one follows a path of 
"authenticity," that is, of profound unity with oneself. 

Even Sartre, for all his emphasis on the "nihilating" freedom of the 
I, arrives at this order of ideas without ever suspecting that they belong 
to a millenary wisdom. He speaks of a "fundamental project," 4 due to 
an original freedom, which is the basis of all the particular plans, goals, 
and passional or voluntary motions that may take form in my "situa- 
tion." Even for him there is a pretemporal, timeless choice, "a unitary 
synthesis of all my present possibilities," which remain in the latent 
state in my being until "particular circumstances bring them to light, 
without thereby suppressing tlfeir membership in a whole." We might 
think of an analogy of such ideas with what was said about the testing 
self-knowledge, the amor fati, and even the Dionysian state, but always 
as limited to that part of my being that is tied to form. There is, how- 
ever, an essential difference in the fact that for existentialist conscious- 
ness the way leading "back" is blocked: it strikes against something 
that seems impenetrable, unjustifiable, indeed fatal to it. Sartre even 
says drastically that any particular use of that inescapable freedom, 
whether in voluntary or passionate, rational or irrational decisions, 
occurs "when the bets are already laid." Thus he compares the original 
choice to the act of throwing the ball onto the roulette wheel, an act 
with which everything is already potentially decided. 

We therefore face a curious contrast between two distinct themes: 
that of formless freedom having nothingness as its basis, and that of 
a species of destiny, a primal determination that basically annuls the 
former or renders it as illusory as ever. This mirrors an inner sensation 
typical of a period of dissolution. 

Against this background, two motifs of Heidegger's seem fairly 
insignificant, which might otherwise correspond to the elements already 
mentioned for the attitude of the integrated man. One is his concept of 
decision (Entschlossenheit), which corresponds to acts that are true to 
one's own Self and awaken one from the state of anodyne and semicon- 
scious living among others. The other is the concept of the instant as an 
active and continuous opening in time to circumstances as they present 



Existence, <S A Project Flung into the World" 89 

themselves, as chances for realizing one's own possibilities. The cor- 
respondence is only an outward one. In fact, the existentialist perspec- 
tives do not seem much different from those of theistic theology when 
it talks about the "freedom of the creature," meaning the freewill that 
God has given to man while leaving him the sole alternatives of either 
renouncing it, or else being banished and damned if he makes real use 
of it by deciding and acting in any way but to accept and follow the 
divine will and law. 

This religious framework is obviously lacking when existentialism 
reflects the climate of the world without God, but the same situation 
exists in covert form, with the same emotional complexes. It is directly 
admitted in the existentialism that has deviated in the religious direc- 
tion (Jaspers, Marcel, Wust, not to mention the Italian epigones of this 
trend). Jaspers, for example, ends by limiting existential freedom to that 
which enables the project presented as a given possibility to be actuated 
or not actuated, but not changed. He draws from this a moral impera- 
tive in these terms: "This is how you must be, if you are faithful to 
yourself." 5 Evil, the non-value, is referred instead to the will that denies 
itself because it contradicts itself, because it does not choose that which 
it has already chosen to be. This may again appear to be partly the path 
that we have traced, until we reach the moment of divergence, which is 
Jaspers's passivity in the face of a "boundary situation" whose opaque- 
ness causes him to swerve and abdicate. He even cites the Christian 
saying: "Thy will be done," and adds: "I feel with certainty that in my 
freedom I am not free by virtue of myself, but that I am therein given 
to myself; I can even fail in myself and not attain my freedom." 6 For 
him, the supreme freedom is to be "aware of oneself as freedom from 
the world and as supreme dependence on the transcendent," and he also 
mentions the "hidden and ever uncertain demand that comes from the 
divinity." 7 

Heidegger also speaks of having oneself before one as "an inexo- 
rable enigma," 8 of the possible being (of the I) delivered or entrusted 
to itself, involved in a given possibility about which freewill can no 
longer be indifferent. Yet this author denies that there is any entity from 
which to derive "Dasein," that is, my concrete and determined being 
in the world and in time. Worse yet, Heidegger can find nothing better 



90 The Dead End of Existentialism 

than to revive the concept of the "voice of conscience/' 9 interpreted as 
"a call that comes from myself, and yet from above me" 10 when I am 
deafened by the din of inauthentic, anodyne, exterior life, and have no 
heart for the choice already made. The fact that Heidegger sees in the 
voice of conscience an objective, constitutional phenomenon of Dasein 
and abstains, following his phenomenological method, from interpret- 
ing it in a religious or moral sense, does not in the least affect the passiv- 
ity of the experience and the relative transcendence ("above me") of this 
voice. Thus he treats as nonexistent the critical effort of the nihilistic 
period, which showed how indeterminate and relative this "voice" is, 
lacking any normative, objective, or unequivocal value. 

When Sartre treats the "original project" and says "I choose the 
whole of myself in the*whole of the world," 11 he admits the possibility of 
a change affecting the original choice, but in terms of a breakdown, an 
abyssal menace that looms over the individual from birth till death. We, 
on the other hand, have seen that it is only through such awakenings 
that the norm of absolutely being oneself can receive its confirmation 
and its supreme legitimization as freedom, unconditionality, and tran- 
scendence. It is the second degree of the testing knowledge of oneself 
that was considered earlier. How distant it is from the existentialists' 
horizons will become clear from once more addressing Jaspers. 

Jaspers speaks of the "unconditioned demand" through which is 
manifested "the Being, the eternal, or whatever one likes to call the 
other dimension of being." It is a command to act in a way that has no 
motive or justification in objective, rational, or naturalistic terms. One 
might almost think that it was the detached, "pure action" that I have 
described. 

The framework, in itself, is acceptable: "The loss of positions falsely 
believed to be safe opens up a possibility of wavering that reveals not an 
abyss but a realm of freedom; that which appeared to be nothingness 
manifests as the place from which the most authentic being speaks*" 
But when we try to see what Jaspers means by "the hidden uncon- 
ditioned, which only in extreme situations governs the course of life 
with tacit decision," we find the categories of "good" and "evil" reap- 
pearing, at three levels. At the first level, what appears as "evil" is 
the existence of the man who remains in the conditioned state where 



Existence, "A Project Flung into the World" 91 

animal life unfolds, ruly or unruly, mutable, and void of decision. Up 
to this point I might agree, if Jaspers did not add that such an existence 
must be subject to "moral values" (where do these come from? what 
justifies them?), and if he would make it clear that this is not a matter of 
the particular contents of action, but of the various forms in which any 
action whatever, without restrictions or exclusions, can be lived. Thus 
it would not necessarily exclude those actions that in a different human 
type would belong to "naturalistic" or conditioned life. 

At Jaspers' second level, "evil" is human weakness in the face of 
what ought to done; it is the self-deception and impurity of motives 
with which we justify certain actions and behaviors in our own eyes. 
Here too I find nothing to object to. But at the third level, "evil" is 
the "will to evil," 12 defined as "the nihilistic will to destruction for its 
own sake," the impulse to cruelty, "the nihilistic will to destroy all that 
is and has value." On the other hand, "good" is love, which carries 
one toward being and creates a relationship with transcendence that 
in the opposite case would be dissolved in the egotistic affirmation of 
the I. No comment is needed to indicate how little unconditioned is the 
"unconditioned demand" of which Jaspers speaks. One does not have 
to go as far as Nietzsche in exalting the opposite kind of behavior, such 
as lawlessness, cruelty, and "superhuman" hardness, in order to real- 
ize that Jaspers has fallen headfirst into the orbit of religious or social 
moralizing, and that the case of a deconditioning rupture that I have 
described, which incurs the extreme test of one's own ontological status 
and the verification of one's sovereignty, has no place in his system. 

To conclude this part of my analysis, it can be said that existential- 
ism leaves the fundamental problem unresolved: that of a specific, pos- 
itive, and central relationship with the transcendent dimension. For it is 
only the place of transcendence within us that can decide on the value 
and ultimate sense of the existential tasks relating to the absolute mas- 
tery of Dasein, that is, what I am or can be in a determinate way. That 
we have to call a draw in this regard is evident from the way the existen- 
tialists conceive of the pretemporal act (if they do conceive of it, and not 
simply leave it to the oblivion of absurdity), which they have rightly 
posited as the origin of individuation, real or possible as the case may 
be. We see motifs here that seem to replicate those of Orphic or 



92 The Dead End of Existentialism 

Schopenhauerian pessimism: existence, Dasein, is felt not only as expul- 
sion and as "being flung" (Geworfenheit) irrationally into the world, 
but also as a "fall" (Heidegger's Ab-fallen, Verf alien) and even as a debt 
or a fault (which is the double meaning of the German word Schuld). 
Existential angst, then, is caused by the act or choice with which one 
obscurely willed to be what one now is, or what one ought to be (if one 
can); it is caused by the use made of a freedom that is in a way transcen- 
dent, for which there is no meaning or explanation but for which one 
remains responsible. 

None of the philosophical efforts of the existentialists, especially 
Heidegger and Sartre, have managed to give meaning to such notions, 
which really derive from a covert, tenacious residue of an extroverted 
religious attitude, specifically from the offshoot of the idea of original 
sin as given in Spinoza's axiom: Omnis determinatio est negatio {every 
determination is a negation). This comes down to saying that Dasein 
is blameworthy "just by the simple fact of existing"; existence, both 
in fact and as a simple project, is in every case determined and finite, 
hence it necessarily excludes all the infinite possibilities of pure being, 
which might equally well have been the object of the original choice. 
That is why it is "guilty." Jaspers in particular underlines this point: My 
guilt lies in the destiny of having chosen (and of not having been able 
not to choose) only the one direction that corresponds to my real or 
possible being, and negating all the others. This is also the source of my 
responsibility and "debt" toward the infinite and the eternal. 

Such an order of ideas could obviously only appeal to a human 
type who was so off center with regard to transcendence as to feel that 
it was external to himself. This makes him incapable of identification 
with the principle of his own choice and his own freedom before time; 
and hence, as counterpart, the Sartrean sensation of freedom as some- 
thing alien to which one is condemned. A further and more particular 
implication appears in a rigid, false, substance-bound concept of tran- 
scendence — of the Absolute, Being, the Infinite, or whatever one prefers 
to call the principle in which occurred the original individualizing and 
finalizing act that is presented as a fall. The absurdity of this view can 
be illustrated by a parallel from everyday life. It is as though I had been 
left entirely to myself in deciding how to pass the evening — going to a 



Existence, "A Project Flung into the World" 93 

concert, staying at home to read, going out to dance or drink, and so 
on — and then made to feel guilty and indebted simply because I had 
decided for one of these possibilities and excluded the others* Someone 
who is really free, when he does what he wants, has no "complexes" 
or soul-searching of this kind, nor does he feel "finalized" and fallen 
because he thereby excludes other possibilities. He knows that he could 
have done otherwise, but only a hysteric or neurotic would be driven by 
such a thought into "existential anguish*" Admittedly, the transparency 
in oneself of one's own original basis, the Grund, may be of very differ- 
ent degrees, but it is the orientation that counts here. Measured by this 
touchstone, existentialism condemns itself. 

Making a short digression to the abstract, metaphysical plane, I 
find false and constricting the conception of an absolute and an infi- 
nite that are condemned to indetermination and to fluctuation in the 
merely possible. Rather, the truly infinite is free power: the power of a 
self-determination that is not at all its own negation, but its own affir- 
mation. It is not the fall from a sort of substantialized "totality," but 
the simple use of the possible. Arising from this idea, one can see the 
absurdity of speaking of existence as a fault or sin, merely by virtue of 
being a determined existence. Nothing prevents us from adopting the 
contrary point of view, for example, that of classical Greece, which sees 
in limit and form the manifestation of a perfection, a completion, and 
a kind of reflection of the Absolute, 

The human type to whom all these existentialist ideas appeal is 
characterized by a fractured will and remains so; the will (and the free- 
dom) of the "before" to which the mystery of Dasein refers, and the 
will (and the freedom) of this same Dasein in the world and in the 
"situation," are not rejoined (rejoining the two parts of a broken sword 
was an esoteric theme used in the symbolism of medieval chivalric lit- 
erature). 13 When Jaspers asserts that knowing my own origin as an exis- 
tence determined by a choice does not "possibilize" me, that is, does 
not release the obscure bonds and the irrationality that this represents 
and thereby give me freedom (or the presentiment of freedom), this evi- 
dently derives from the fact of feeling separated from that origin, cut off 
from the transcendent dimension, sundered from the original being. For 
the same reason, Kierkegaard conceived the coexistence of the temporal 



94 The Dead End of Existentialism 

and the eternal, of the transcendent and the unrepeatable individua- 
tion in existence, as a paradoxical "dialectic" situation, anguishing and 
tragic, to be accepted as it is rather than overcome by posing the second 
term in function of the first, so as to restore to unity that which in man 
"is fragment and mystery and terrible chance." 

When jaspers himself says that without the presence of transcen- 
dence, freedom would be purely arbitrary without any sense of blame, 
he confirms in the clearest way possible how existence senses tran- 
scendence — namely, as a species of paralyzing and anguishing "stone 
guest." By projecting it outside oneself, one's relationship to transcen- 
dence is off center, exterior, and dependent. This is so much like the 
relationship in religious consciousness that one might well accuse this 
philosophy of making a lot of fuss about nothing, and of being just a 
prolongation of the religious world in crisis, not a space that can open 
itself affirmatively beyond that world. Transcendence, like freedom, 
ought to furnish existence with a foundation of calm and incompa- 
rable security, with a purity, a wholeness, and an absolute decisiveness 
in action. Instead, it feeds all the emotional complexes of the man in 
crisis: angst, nausea, disquiet, finding his own being problematical, the 
feeling of an obscure guilt or fall, deracination, a feeling of the absurd 
and the irrational, an unadmitted solitude (though some, like Marcel, 
fully admit it), an invocation of the "incarnate spirit," the weight of an 
incomprehensible responsibility — incomprehensible, because he can- 
not resort to overtly religious (and hence coherent) positions like those 
of Kierkegaard or Barth, where angst refers to the sentiment of the soul 
that is alone, fallen, and abandoned to itself in the presence of God. In 
all of this, feelings appear like those that Nietzsche warned about in 
the case of a man who has made himself free without having the neces- 
sary stature: feelings that kill and shatter a man — modern man — if he 
is incapable of killing them. 



15 

Heidegger: 
"Retreating Forwards" 
and "Being-for-Death" 

Collapse of Existentialism 



To complete this "existential" analysis of the basis of existentialism, 
it will be useful to return to Heidegger, who, like Sartre, excludes the 
"vertical opening" of religion and claims to be "phenomenologically" 
agnostic. 

We have seen that the obscurity already inherent in existentialism is 
exacerbated in Heidegger by his view of man as an entity that does not 
include being within itself (or behind it, as its root), but rather before 
it, as if being were something to be pursued and captured. Being is 
conceived here as the totality of possibilities, with regard to which one 
is to blame, or, taking the other meaning of Schuld^ in debt. The exis- 
tentialists never explain why this is the case, or why one should feel 
this destiny of seizing a pandemic totality at all costs. We can explain it 
with reference to what I have already said: that it is all symptomatic of 
someone who suffers the unfolding or activity of the transcendent as a 
coercive force, with no feeling of freedom. It is as though the possibili- 
ties necessarily excluded from a finite being (finitude being negation, 
as explained in chapter 14) were projected onto goals and situations 
deployed in time; as though man had being before him, running ahead 
of him (the term used is actually Sich-vorweg-sein) in a process that can 
never lead to a real possession, in a "horizontally ecstatic" 1 succession 
(ecstasy here in the literal meaning of exit from a stasis) that consti- 
tutes "authentic temporality." This is how Heidegger presents things; 



95 



I: 



96 The Dead End of Existentialism 

no other meaning is permitted for man's being, as long as he is alive, 
because he always suffers from nontotality. 

The prospects could not be darker. Dasein, the I, which is noth- 
ing in itself, pursues being that is outside and before it, and thus runs 
through time, in the same dependent relationship as the thirsty man 
seeking water — with the difference that it is inconceivable that he will 
ever reach Being, when he does not already possess it (as the Eleatic 
philosophers said, no violence can make that to be which is not). The 
view of life in Heideggerian existentialism could well be characterized 
by Bernanos's expression; a retreat forward (une fuite en avant). It also 
underlines the absurdity of speaking of a "decision" (Entschlossenheit), 
in a really affirmative sense, for any action or moment in which the 
"horizontal ecstasy" is developing, whereas that is exactly what applies 
to the human type who interests us: becoming and existing in time are 
substantially transformed in their structure and significance. The dark 
downward pull, the neediness, compulsion, and unquiet tension are 
destroyed, and existence takes on a character of acting and living deci- 
sively, arising from an existing principle that is detached and free with 
regard to itself and its determined action. This happens naturally when 
the accent falls away from the I, or is transferred to the transcendent 
dimension — to Being. 

Someone has spoken of a "frenetic desire to live, to live at any 
price, which is not the result of the rhythm of life within us, but of 
the rhythm of death." This is one of the principal traits of our time. 
One would not be rash in saying that this is the ultimate meaning of 
Heidegger's existentialism, when thought through to its foundations, 
that is, of existentialism that admits no religious opening. This is its 
effective "existential" content, however it may seem to the philosopher 
himself. 

This significance seems to be confirmed by the ideas one meets 
with in Heidegger concerning death, which are otherwise fairly 
strange. Basically, it is only in death that he sees, and problematically 
confines, the possibility of capturing this that is always escaping and 
fleeing before us in time. Therefore Heidegger speaks of existence in 
general as a "Being-towards-death," as a "Being-for-the-end." 2 Death 
overcomes being because it halts its constant, irremediable privation 



Heidegger: "Retreating forwards" and " Being- for-Death'* 97 

and non-totality, and offers it "its very own possibility, unconditioned 
and insuperable." And the individual's anguish in the face of death, 
which deals the deathblow to Dasein, is the anguish in the face of this 
possibility. This emotional coloring is again typical and significant, 
showing how the condition of passivity persists even here, in the face 
of that "end" that represents the "accomplishment," as in the dual 
sense of the Greek word telos^ in the context of the traditional doctrine 
of mors triumphalis (triumphal death). Heidegger proceeds with an 
accusation of a form of "inauthenticity" and diversionary tranquil- 
ization aimed not only at the stupid indifference to death but also at 
the attitude that judges the preoccupation with death, and anguish in 
the face of it, as effeminate and cowardly, preferring to face it with 
impassibility* He speaks of the "courage to have anguish in the face of 
death," 3 which is absolutely inconceivable, not to say ridiculous, for an 
integrated human type. 

The negative character of the whole existential process, which 
includes death and gravitates around it, is once again confirmed by 
Heidegger's talk of "dying as being flung into one's very own possibil- 
ity of being, unconditioned and insuperable." 4 It sounds like a destiny 
of the most somber kind. And just as what lies before Dasein, the prior 
state of what we are, falls outside the zone illuminated by Heideggerian 
(and non-Heideggerian) existential awareness, so everything "after 
death" is left in obscurity, including the problems of survival and post- 
humous states, of a higher or lower existence after this mortal one. 
Even less attention is given to that "typology of death" that ha? had 
such an important part in traditional doctrines: they have seen in the 
various ways of approaching death a most important factor regarding 
what death itself might represent, and, moreover, what may occur post- 
mortem in each case. 

The few positive motifs casually touched on by Heidegger are thus 
neutralized by an essential limitation. Remarks such as that freedom "is 
the foundation" (that is, the basis of "that being which is our truth") 
"and as such is also the bottomless abyss of Dasein/' turn out to 
lack any real significance, no more than the need to "free oneself 
from Egoity [Ichheit, the quality of being an I] to conquer oneself 
in an authentic selfhood" (which would return to that abyssal free- 



98 The Dead End of Existentialism 

dom). Replying to the accusation of affirming an "anthropocentric" 
freedom, Heidegger hastens to recall that for him the essence of Dasein 
is "ecstatic, hence eccentric" (sic!), and that thus the feared freedom is 
an error; so that after all there remains the simple alternative of inau- 
thentic existence, which is fleeing from oneself and dissolving in the 
irrelevant and anodyne life of everyday society, or else the obedience 
to the demand of being that translates into accepting one's "Being- 
towards-death," after spending one's life in the vain pursuit of that 
fata morgana, the totality of being; that is, after having experienced 
transcendence solely as that which unfolds and urges from within the 
individual and his becoming, acting almost as a vis a tergo (force from 
behind). 

As a last point, I would mention the final collapse of existential- 
ism as seen in Jaspers's views on foundering, defeat, and failure (das 
Scheitern). One must first accept two fairly incompatible conditions. 
One concerns that free realization of the being that we are not, but are 
able to be — and strictly speaking, we could stop here and resolve the 
existential problem in these terms, which is the elementary or partial 
solution that I have repeatedly considered. At the same time, Jaspers, 
like Heidegger, speaks of man's impulse to embrace being, not as this 
or that particular being, but as pure and total being. This impulse is 
destined to fail in all its positive forms. Pure being may present itself 
outside us through a "ciphered language," by means of symbols, but 
in its essence it is "transcendent" in the negative sense, thus impos- 
sible to be attained in any way. This character of the object of our 
deepest metaphysical impulse manifests itself in the "boundary situa- 
tions" against which we are powerless. For Jaspers, examples of these 
are guilt, chance, death, the ambiguity of the world, and being taken by 
surprise. In the face of all these situations that "transcend" us, one can 
supposedly react either inauthentically with self-mystifications, decep- 
tions, and attempted evasions, or else authentically, facing up to reality 
with desperation and anguish. 

It is hardly necessary here to point out the absolute falsity of these 
alternatives, because there are other reactions possible, such as those I 
have defined for the integrated man — not to mention everything Sartre 
has discovered about the fundamental freedom and intangibility of the 



Heidegger: "Retreating forwards" and " Being- for-Deatb" 99 

I. But it is interesting to see what solution appears to Jaspers as the 
"authentic" reaction. This solution consists of recognizing one's own 
defeat, one's own checkmate or foundering, even in the effort of gaining 
or somehow attaining being: only at that point, as the negative som- 
ersaults into the positive, does one enter the presence of being, and 
existence opens itself to being. "It is decisive how man lives defeat (or 
failure or foundering — Scheitern): whether it remains hidden in order 
to crush him in the end, or whether it appears unveiled, placing itself 
in front of the inescapable limits of his own Dasein; either he seeks 
solutions and palliatives that are inconsistent and fantastic, or else he 
frankly keeps silence on account of the presence of the inexplicable." 
At that point, nothing is left but faith. For Jaspers, the way consists 
precisely in desiring one's own defeat, one's foundering, more or less 
like the Gospel principle of losing one's life in order to find it. Let go, 
quit the game: "the will to eternity, far from refusing failure, recognizes 
there its own goal." The tragic collapse of the self is identified with the 
epiphany or opening to transcendence. At the very moment when I, as 
myself, see Being escaping me, it reveals itself to me, and thereupon I 
attain the supreme enlightenment of the existential duplicity in itself — 
the point of departure for all existentialism since Kierkegaard — which 
is supposed to clarify the relationship between my finite existence and 
transcendence. It is a sort of ecstatic and believing opening, in defeat. 
This is the price of superseding the anguish and disquiet of living, seek- 
ing, and striving, with a state of peace, of which one can hardly miss 
its basis in Christianity, and specifically in the dialectical theology of 
Protestantism. 

Jaspers's only attempt to go beyond this truly creaturely level con- 
cerns the concept of the "All-encompassing" (das Umgreifende). This 
is a far echo of ideas that also belong to traditional teaching. The prob- 
lem is posed by that dual consciousness that is always led to objectiv- 
ize, to juxtapose an object to the I as subject, and can therefore never 
grasp the ultimate root of being, the reality in which we are contained, 
which is anterior and superior to this duality. Jaspers seems to allow the 
possibility of overcoming the subject-object division and experiencing 
unity, the "All-encompassing." It is necessary for every object (anything 
juxtaposed to myself as I) to disappear, and for the I to dissolve. But 



M. 



r 
i '? , 



! 



100 The Dead End of Existentialism 

given the sentiment of oneself that, as we have seen exhaustively, is the 
only one known to the human type considered by this philosopher, it is 
natural that everything would be reduced to another sort of foundering, 
to the simple mystical experience of "diving into the All-encompassing" 
(these are Jaspers's words). It is the equivalent of Heidegger's confused, 
passive, and ecstatic bursting into Being through death, after "living 
for death." It is just as antithetical to any positive, clear, and sovereign 
realization or opening to the transcendent as the true ground of being 
and of Dasein, in an effective and creative conquest of the dual state. 

With this, we can conclude our analysis of existentialism. To summa- 
rize it, existentialism takes over some of the Nietzschean demands, but 
cannot go beyond them except as concerns the point highlighted in the 
preceding examination: by including transcendence as a constitutive 
element. Only here can existentialism relate to the human type who 
concerns us; and the logical consequence should have been the break 
with all naturalism and with every immanent religion of life. Including 
this dimension in existentialism, however, causes it to fall right into cri- 
sis, and none of the solutions offered on the grounds of emotional and 
subintellectual complexes — anguish, guilt, destiny, extraneity, solitude, 
disquiet, nausea, the problem of Dasein, and so on — go beyond the 
point one could have reached by developing and rectifying the postni- 
hilist positions of Nietzsche, or even go as far as that. 

As we have seen, in Kierkegaard, Jaspers, and Marcel, not to men- 
tion other exponents of a "Catholic existentialism" that passes for 
"positive existentialism," the transcendent in question ends up as the 
object of faith and devotion. It makes little difference that they use a 
novel, abstract, and abstruse terminology instead of the more honest 
one of orthodox theistic theology. The "free" man again looks back- 
ward to the abandoned earth, and with an "invocation" (the actual 
term used by Marcel) tries to reestablish a tranquilizing contact with 
the dead God* 

Taken as a whole, the existential balance adds up to a negative. It 
acknowledges the structural duality of existence and transcendence, 
but the center of gravity of the I does not fall on the transcendent, 
but on the existent side. Transcendence is basically conceived as the 



i-S 






Heidegger; "Retreating forwards" and " Being- for-Death" 101 

"other," whereas one ought rather to conceive it the other way around, 
with one's own determined, "situational" being, one's Dasein, as 
"other" to the true Self that one is. The former represents a simple 
manifestation in the human state, and is subject to the correspond- 
ing conditions, which are relative because they often act in various 
ways according to the attitudes one assumes. (As I have said, this is 
the positive contribution of Sartre's analysis.) Even though the relation 
between the terms may often seem obscure and problematic — and that 
is the only real problem of the inner life — it does not destroy the feeling 
that the integrated man has of centrality, calm, sovereignty, superiority 
over himself, and "transcendent confidence*" 

This confirms the fundamental difference between the human type 
who finds his reflection in existential philosophy, and the one who 
still preserves, as an indelible character, the substance of the man of 
Tradition. Existentialism is a projection of modern man in crisis, rather 
than of modern man beyond crisis. Anyone who already possesses that 
inner dignity described above, as natural as it is detached, or who "has 
long wandered in a strange land, lost among things and contingencies," 
finds this philosophy absolutely alien to him. Through crises, tests, 
errors, destructions, and successes he has rediscovered the Self, and he 
is reestablished in the Self, in Being, in a calm and unshakable mode. 
Equally distant is the man who has learned to give a law to himself 
from the heights of a superior freedom, so that he can walk on that rope 
stretched over an abyss, of which it is said: "It is perilous to cross from 
one side to the other, perilous to find oneself in the middle, perilou? to 
tremble or to stop." 

It is perhaps not so unkind to think that little else was to be expected 
from the speculations of men who, like almost all the "serious" exis- 
tentialists (as distinct from those of the new "generation at risk"), are 
professors, mere armchair intellectuals whose lifestyle, aside from their 
so-called problems and positions, has always been of the petit bourgeois 
type. They are far from being "burned out" or beyond good and evil in 
their actual existence, which is conformist except in the few cases that 
flaunt a political plumage, sometimes liberal, sometimes communist. 

Men in revolt within the chaotic life of the great cities, or men who 
have passed through the storms of steel and fire and the destructions of 



102 The Dead End of Existentialism 

the last total wars, or have grown up in the bombed-out zones , are the 
ones who possess in greater measure the premises for the reconquest of 
a higher sense of life and for an existential overcoming, not theoretical 
but genuine, of all the problems of man in crisis; and these are also the 
points of departure for any corresponding speculative expressions. 

In conclusion, it may be interesting to give an example of the value 
that some themes touched on in existentialism may have, when assimi- 
lated to a different human type and integrated into traditional teaching. 
The example is offered by the idea of that sort of transcendent decision 
or choice that, as we have seen, many existentialists place at the foun- 
dation of every individual's Dasein in the world. It underlies his having 
a certain range of possibilities and types of experience, and not others, 
•and his awareness of having come from far away; thus it also supplies 
him at least with a line of less resistance, and maybe even with the basis 
for authentic existence and fidelity to himself. 

I have already mentioned the presence of a similar teaching in the 
traditional world. I would add that it is not only part of the esoteric 
doctrine of that world, but often of the general, exoteric view of life, 
where it takes the form of the doctrine of preexistence (not to be con- 
fused with that of reincarnation, which is only a popular symbolic for- 
mulation, and absurd if taken literally). The rejection of the doctrine of 
preexistence must be counted among the limitations of the theistic and 
creationist theology that has come to predominate in the West. On the 
one hand, this has mirrored, and on the other, it has furthered a sup- 
pression or silence about the prehuman and nonhuman dimension of 
the person, of Dasein. 

Now, we have seen that existentialism often exhibits a presenti- 
ment of this ancient truth, giving rise either to the anguishing sensa- 
tion of an insuperable limitation that is obscure if not absurd, or else 
to the abdication and retreat into a creatural attitude in a more or less 
religious sense. In the differentiated type who interests us, on the con- 
trary, the same presentiment can only act as it has always acted in the 
upper strata of the traditional world, being a most essential part of the 
attitude required for staying on one's feet and "riding the tiger." As 
an opening to the doctrine of preexistence, it generates an unequalled 
force. It reawakens the consciousness of one's origins and of a higher 



Heidegger: "Retreating forwards" and " Being- for~Death" 103 



&? 



f 



freedom in the heart of the world, the awareness of having come from 
far away, thus also that of a distance. The natural effects will be along 
the lines indicated: the relativization of everything that seems so impor- 
tant and decisive in human existence as such, but in terms absolutely 
opposed to indifference, sloth, and alienation. It is only on the basis of 
this sensation that the dimension of Being can open up more and more, 
beyond the physical I, thereby strengthening the capacity for involving 
and giving one's whole self, not for the sake of exaltation, ecstasies, 
or a merely vital task, but according to the duality already mentioned 
when speaking of pure action. In fact, the ultimate criterion of being 
able to be destroyed, even, without thereby being wounded — which can 
easily present itself in an epoch such as we live in, and such as will 
very likely continue — is closely related to the lived experience of pre- 
existence, which indicates the direction in which the "two parts of the 
sword" may be reunited. 



Part 4 



Dissolution of 
the Individua 



16 

The Dual Aspect 
of Anonymity 



: . ; t 






Turning to a more concrete realm than that of the last chapter, I shall 
now examine the problem of the personality and the individual in the 
contemporary world. There are many today who deplore the "crisis of 
the personality," and while they still pose as defenders of Western civi- 
lization, they often appeal to the "values of the personality/' holding 
them to be a most essential part of the European tradition. 

Thus a problem presents itself, one that cannot simply be solved by 
the facile polemic against the collectivism, mechanization, standardiza- 
tion, and soullessness of modern existence. Moreover, we must make 
it very clear: What exactly is to be saved? Today's intellectuals who 
have at heart the "defense of the personality" give no satisfactory reply, 
because they hold on to what I have called the regime of residual forms 
(see chapter 1), and, almost without exception, they think and evaluate 
in terms of liberalism, natural law, or humanism. 

The true point of departure should instead be the distinction 
between person and individual. Strictly speaking, the concept of the 
individual is that of an abstract, formless, numerical unity. As such, 
the individual has no quality of its own, hence nothing that really dis- 
tinguishes it. Considered simply as individuals, one can assume that 
all men and women are equal, so that we can ascribe equal rights and 
responsibilities to them and presumably equal "dignity" as "human 
beings" (the concept of "human being" is only a dignified version of 
that of the individual). In social terms, this defines the existential level 
proper to "natural rights," liberalism, individualism, and absolute 
democracy. One of the principal and most apparent aspects of modern 
decadence refers, in fact, to the advent of individualism as a conse- 



106 




12 



%- 



The Dual Aspect of Anonymity 107 

quence of the collapse and destruction of the former organic and tradi- 
tionally hierarchical structures, which have been replaced primarily by 
the atomic multiplicity of individuals in the world of quantity, that is to 
say the masses. 

The "defense of the personality" appears insignificant and absurd 
when measured on any individual basis. It makes no sense to position 
oneself against the world of the masses and of quantity without real- 
izing that it is individualism itself that has led to it, in the course of one 
of those processes of "liberation" that historically have ended by taking 
the opposite direction. In our epoch this process has already had irre- 
versible consequences. 

When we turn from the social to the cultural arena, things only seem 
to present themselves in a different way. The cultural field has remained 
somewhat isolated, detached from the larger forces in motion today, and 
that is the only reason the misunderstanding exists. Although atomized 
individualism is not in question here, the idea of the personality is still 
bound to a subjectivism based on the individual, in which the poverty, 
or even the nonexistence of a spiritual basis is concealed by literary and 
artistic talent, by an intellectualism and rootless originality, and by a 
creativity devoid of any profound significance. 

In fact, in the West there has been a collusion between individual- 
ism, subjectivism, and "personality" that goes back to the Renaissance 
period and which developed in the light of that "discovery of man" 
exalted by antitraditional historiography. Historians have carefully 
ignored, or considered as positive, the counterpart, that is, the more 
or less conscious and complete separation from transcendence. All the 
splendor and power of "creativity" of that period should not blind us 
to this basic tendency. Schuon has clarified the true state of affairs 
regarding the artistic realm as follows: "Speaking in human terms, cer- 
tain Renaissance artists are without a doubt great, but their grandeur 
becomes insignificant when faced with the grandeur of the sacred. In 
the sacred, it is as if the genius is concealed; what predominates is an 
impersonal, vast, mysterious intelligence. The sacred work of art has a 
perfume of infinitude, the imprint of the absolute. The individual talent 
is there disciplined; it mingles with the creative function of the entire 
tradition, which cannot be substituted, much less surpassed by the mere 



It 



'I 



108 Dissolution of the Individual 

resources of man." 1 One can say the same regarding self-affirmation on 
other levels of the "personality" in that epoch: from the Machiavellian 
Prince type, with its more or less perfect historical incarnations, to the 
condottieri and demagogues and, in general, all those who received 
Nietzsche's approbation for their prodigious yet unformed accumula- 
tion of power. 

Later, the emphasis on the human and individual I, the basis of 
humanism, would survive only in the by-products of the nineteenth- 
century bourgeois cult of the I, associated with a certain aesthetic cult 
of heroes, geniuses, and "nobility of spirit," But to meet many of the 
current defenders of "personality" one must descend yet another degree, 
to where all the vanity of the I predominates: its exhibitionism, worship 
X>i one's own " inter iority," the craze of originality, the boastfulness of 
brilliant literati and ambitious belletrists. Even with regard to art alone, 
this "personalism" almost always appears joined to an inner impov- 
erishment. Lukacs, though generally opposed to our position, made 
this legitimate remark: "The present-day practice of overestimating and 
exaggerating the importance of creative subjectivity actually betrays 
the weakness and poverty of the writers' individuality. They distinguish 
themselves merely by 'eccentricity,' either spontaneous or painstakingly 
cultivated; their worldview is at such a low level that any attempt they 
make to go beyond subjective immediacy threatens to leave their 'per- 
sonality 5 completely flat. The more that this is the case, the more weight 
is placed on pure, immediate subjectivity, which sometimes is in fact 
identified with literary talent," 2 The character of "normative objectiv- 
ity" that was proper to true, traditional art is altogether lacking. The 
category that Schuon has effectively characterized as "intelligent stu- 
pidity" 3 includes almost all the intellectual efforts in this area. But I 
will not dwell further on considerations at this level — I will return to 
the subject later — beyond pointing out that in contemporary celebrity 
worship we can see the popular, updated edition that takes the former 
"cult of the personality" to ridiculous lengths. 

Whether one is speaking of social individualism, artistic individual- 
ism, narcissistic individualism, or humanistic individualism, it is certain 
that manifold, objective processes of recent times tend to eliminate and 
dissolve these forms of the individualistic personality. In view of the only 



The Dual Aspect of Anonymity 109 

human type who concerns us, and of the general situation, we cannot 
see this as a negative phenomenon, but on the contrary, I would even say 
that the further the dissolution of the "values of the personality" goes, 
whether due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes, the better it will be. 

This is the premise. In order to go further in our analysis, we need 
to leave ambiguity behind and clarify its terms, which is only possible 
if we restore the original and proper meaning to the term "person." 
Originally persona signified "mask": the mask that ancient actors wore 
in playing a given part, in incarnating a given personage. Thereby the 
mask possessed something typical, nonindividual, especially in the case 
of divine masks and even more clearly when used in many archaic rites. 
At this point I can resume and apply the ideas of the preceding chapter 
about the dual structure of the being: the "person" is that which the 
man presents concretely and sensibly in the world, in the position he 
occupies, but always signifying a form of expression and manifestation 
of a higher principle in which the true center of being is to be recog- 
nized, and on which falls, or should fall, the accent of the Self. 

A "mask" is something very precise, delineated, and structured. 
So man as person (= mask) is already differentiated thereby from the 
mere individual; he has a form, is himself, and belongs to himself. 
Consequently, whenever a civilization has had a traditional character, 
the values of the "person" have made of it a world of quality, diversity, 
and types. And the natural consequence has been a system of organic, 
differentiated, and hierarchical relationships: something that cannot be 
said of mass regimes, but also not of regimes of individualism, of "val- 
ues of the personality," or of real or pretended democracy. 

Like the individual, the person itself is in a certain sense closed 
to the external world, and in relation to it, all the existential situa- 
tions whose legitimacy we have already recognized can be of value in 
the present age. Unlike the individual, the person is not closed to the 
above. The personal being is not himself, but has himself (like the rela- 
tion between the actor and his part): it is presence to that which he is, 
not coalescence with that which he is. Moreover, a kind of antinomy 
is brought to light: in order to be truly such, the person needs a refer- 
ence to something more than personal. When this reference is absent, 
the person transforms itself into an "individual," and individualism and 



110 Dissolution of the Individual 

subjectivism come into play. Then, in a first phase, the impression may 
even arise that the values of personality have survived and are even 
stronger, because the center, so to speak, is more displaced toward the 
outside, is more externalized — and this is in fact the position of the 
cultural and creative humanism just mentioned, and in general of the 
so-called great individuals. One can see, however, that the "defense of 
the personality" at this level is a precarious thing, because it has already 
passed into the realm of contingency; nothing acts anymore that has 
deep roots and the force of the original. Henceforth, that which is per- 
sonal loses its symbolic value, its value as a sign of something that tran- 
scends it and by which it is sustained; it loses also, little by little, the 
typical characteristics, that is, the positively anti-individualistic ones 
due solely to that higher reference. Where an independent and distinct 
form still subsists, it affirms itself in a disordered, arbitrary, and purely 
subjective regime. 

As a last aid to orientation, I shall now define the meaning of 
"typicality" in a traditional environment. It represents the meeting 
point between the individual (the person) and the supra-individual, the 
boundary between the two corresponding to a perfect form. Typicality 
de-individualizes, in the sense that the person then essentially incar- 
nates an idea, law, or function. In such a case, one cannot speak of the 
individual in the modern sense; the individual disappears in its casual 
features, when faced with a meaningful structure that could even reap- 
pear almost identically wherever the same perfection is reached. The 
individual is in fact made "typical," that is to say suprapersonal. By 
virtue of the Far Eastern saying, "The absolute Name is no longer a 
name," 4A he is likewise anonymous. Traditionality in the higher sense is 
a type of confirmation of such ainonymity, or an approach to it within a 
particular field of action. One could even speak of the universalization 
and eternalization of the person; but these expressions have deterio- 
rated through rhetorical and abstract usages that have concealed any 
possible concrete or existential meaning. It would be better to define 
the situation in question as that of a being in which the supra-individual 
principle — the Self, transcendence — remains conscious, and gives to 
the developing "part" (the person) the objective perfection correspond- 
ing to a given function and a given meaning. 



The Dual Aspect of Anonymity 111 

As a result, two concepts of impersonality exist, related through 
analogy and at the same time through opposition: on the personal level, 
one is inferior, the other superior. One has for a limit the individual, in 
the formlessness of a numerical and undifferentiated unity that through 
multiplication produces the anonymous mass; the other is the culmina- 
tion typical of a sovereign being, the absolute person. 

The latter possibility rests on a foundation of active anonymity 
that appears in traditional civilizations, defining a position opposed 
to every activity, creativity, or affirmation based merely on the I. And 
the aforementioned conversion, apparently paradoxical, of the personal 
being into an impersonal being, makes itself known in the fact that a 
grandeur of the personality indeed exists, in which the work is more 
visible than the creator, the objective more than the subjective; where 
in the human field something is reflected of that nudity and purity that 
belongs to the grand forces of nature: in history, art, politics, spiritual 
disciplines, and in all the degrees of existence. One could speak of a 
"civilization of anonymous heroes"; but the style of anonymity is also 
realized in the speculative domain, where it goes without saying that 
what is thought according to the truth cannot be signed with the name 
of an individual. One also recalls the custom of abandoning one's own 
name and taking another that no longer refers to the individual, to the 
man, but to the function or superior vocation, where the personality is 
summoned to a higher obligation (for instance, royalty and pontificate, 
monastic orders, and so on). 

All this finds its full significance in a traditional environment. Jn 
the modern world, in an epoch of dissolution, even in this regard only 
the essential orientation can be preserved. And we find that its principal 
aspect faces us with an alternative, and a test. 






17 

Destructions and Liberations in 

the New Realism 



It is said that the crisis of individual and personal values seems des- 
tined to become an irreversible process throughout the modern world, 
despite the existence of residual oases or reservations that withdraw 
into "culture" and empty ideologies, and still accord to these values 
a semblance of life. In practice, the mortal blow to the individual has 
not been dealt by materialism alone, by the world of the masses and 
modern metropolises, but even more by the realm of technology: by 
elementary energies reawakened and controlled in objective processes. 
Also the existential effects of collective, catastrophic experiences, such 
as total warfare with all its cold destruction, have acted in a dehuman- 
izing way, eliminating everything from the old bourgeois world that 
was varied, personal, subjective, arbitrary, and intimate. 

The best illustration of these processes is that of Ernst Jiinger, in 
his work Der Arbeiter} I can certainly agree with Jiinger when he says 
that these processes of the current world have caused the individual to 
be superseded by the "type," together with an essential impoverish- 
ment of his traits and ways of life, and a dissolution of cultural, human, 
and personal values. In the vast majority of cases, the destruction is 
suffered passively: the man of today is the mere object of it. The result 
is an empty, mass-produced human type, marked by standardization 
and flat uniformity; a "mask" in the negative sense; an insignificant, 
multiple product. 

The de-individualization that stems, however, from these very 
causes, this environment, these spiritual ravages, may actually take an 
active and positive course. This is the case that concerns us, and which 
the differentiated type of man whom we have in view should consider. 



112 



Destructions and Liberations in the New Realism 113 

Jiinger himself refers to that which sometimes manifested in recent 
times in extreme, life-threatening situations, mainly in modern war- 
fare. In the material battle, in which technology seems to turn against 
man with its systematic destruction and its activation of elementary 
forces, the individual as combatant cannot face it without being blown 
apart — not only physically but spiritually — unless he passes into a new 
form of existence. This form is characterized by two things: first, by an 
extreme lucidity and objectivity, and second, by a capacity to act and 
stay upright that is drawn from profound forces, beyond the categories 
of the individual, of ideals, of values, and of the goals of bourgeois 
civilization. What is important here is a natural union of life with risk, 
beyond the instinct of self-preservation, including situations in which 
one's own physical destruction is parallel to the attainment of the abso- 
lute sense of existence, and actualizes the "absolute person." We might 
call this the ultimate case of "riding the tiger," 

Jiinger believed that he could recognize a symbol of this style in 
the "unknown soldier" (adding that there are not only unknown sol- 
diers, but also unknown officers). Apart from situations of which no 
report ever comes to light, anonymous actions at the limits of the life 
of the physical individual that remain without spectators and have 
no pretence to recognition or glory, nor are attributable to romantic 
heroism — apart from these, Jiinger showed that through processes of 
this kind men of a recognizably new type often tend to take form and 
differentiate themselves, not only by their behavior but by their actual 
physical traits, their "mask." This modern type contains the destruc- 
tion within himself and is no longer comprehensible in terms of the 
"individual": he is outside the values of humanism. But the essential 
thing is to recognize the reality of processes that, if they act in extreme 
mode during modern total warfare, may repeat in other forms and 
other degrees of intensity when they encounter a suitable substance. 
This can even occur in peacetime, in all of today's highly mechanized 
existence, striking the individual and supplanting him with an imper- 
sonal "type" marked by a certain uniformity. The faces of men and 
women take on the appearance of masks, "metallic masks in the one, 
cosmetic masks in the other." In their gestures and expressions there 
is a sort of "abstract cruelty," correlating with the ever-increasing 



114 Dissolution of the Individual 

space in today's world that is taken up by technology, quantity, geom- 
etry, and everything that refers to objective relationships. 

These are indubitably some of the essential aspects of contemporary 
existence, in view of which people have spoken of a new barbarism. But 
what, then, is the culture that might oppose it and serve as refuge for 
the person? There is truly a lack of valid reference points. Jiinger was 
certainly mistaken in thinking that the active process of depersonaliza- 
tion is the main trend in the postbourgeois world; and later he him- 
self had to return to a very different order of ideas. The prevalent and 
determining trends are, and will be increasingly in future, the passive 
destructive processes from which can only arise a squalid uniformity, a 
reduction to types that lack the dimension of depth and any metaphysi- 
cal quality, defining themselves at an existential level even lower than 
the already problematic one of the individual and the person. 

The positive possibilities can only apply to a small minority: to 
those beings in whom the transcendent dimension is preexistent or can 
be awakened. This brings us back, of course, to the one problem that 
concerns us. These are the only ones who can give new values to a soul- 
less world of machines, of technology, of modern mega-cities, and of 
all that is sheer reality and objectivity, which appears cold, inhuman, 
menacing, devoid of intimacy, depersonalizing, and barbaric. By fully 
accepting this reality and these processes, the differentiated man can 
essentialize and form himself according to a valid personal equation, 
activating the transcendent dimension within, burning out the dregs of 
individuality, and thus revealing the absolute person. 

For this it is not necessary to consider only exceptional and bor- 
derline situations. It is a matter of the general style of a new active 
realism that opens up pathways even in the midst of chaos and medioc- 
rity. Among other things, the machine itself may appear as a symbol, 
and everything that has taken form in certain sectors of the modern 
world in terms of pure functionality, especially in architecture. The 
machine symbolizes a form born from an exact, objective adjustment 
of the means to the end, with the exclusion of everything superfluous, 
arbitrary, irrelevant, or subjective. It is a form that precisely realizes an 
idea: the idea, in this case, of the purpose for which it is made. On its 
own plane, it reflects in a way the same value as the classical world 



Destructions and Liberations in the New Realism 115 

knew through geometrical form, number as entity, and the whole Doric 
principle of "nothing in excess." Some have spoken of a metaphysics of 
the machine, and of new archetypes heralded in the perfect functional 
forms of our time. If this is meaningless on the prosaic plane of every- 
day modern reality, it may have meaning on its own, symbolic plane, 
where one certainly does not envisage mechanization, rationalization, 
and utility, but rather the value of form and the love of form. Here the 
style of objectivity should not be confused with that of disanimation, 
but can be taken along the lines already mentioned: of impersonal per- 
fection in every work. 

It is interesting to notice an orientation of this kind among the cur- 
rents of the post-World War I period, whose slogan was "new objectiv- 
ity" (Neue Sacblicbkeit). Books like R Matzke's Jugend bekennt: so 
sind wirl (Youth admits: That's how we are!) do not deal with demands 
satisfiable on the artistic and literary plane, but with the inner form 
that a human type of the new generation involuntarily finds itself with, 
simply as the effect of the general objective processes of the times. On 
this plane one can define a realism that signifies coolness, clarity, seri- 
ousness, and purity; detachment from the world of sentimentalism, of 
ego problems, of melodramatic tragedy, of the whole legacy of twilight 
romanticism, idealism, and expressionism: a realism that entails the 
sense of the vanity of the I and of believing oneself important as an 
individual. 2 Matzke wrote: "We are objective, because for us the real- 
ity of things is great, infinite, and everything human is too small, lim- 
ited, and polluted with 'soul'." 3 He spoke of the language of things and 
actions, to be substituted for that of feelings; of an inner form that has 
nothing to do with books, culture, or science, so that it can be much 
more precise in the "barbarian" than in the "civilized" being of the 
bourgeois world. Hence the term "objective asceticism" has been used 
of this attitude; and one may also recall the expression of Stravinsky: 
"to freeze things." 4 

I must emphasize that this attitude is based neither on pessimism 
nor on a concealed philosophy of desperation. It is not concerned with 
values and goals that it now recognizes as illusory, or with its impotence 
to control reality, or its own inadequacy. The very sense of these values 
and goals is nonexistent, leaving action to be free, in a pure and cool 



? \ ; 



116 Dissolution of the Individual 

atmosphere. Drawing an analogy from the world of the arts, Matzke 
refers to the criteria that Albrecht Schaeffer followed in translating 
Homer: he wanted to convey "the loftiness of the far-off, the differ- 
ent, the strange," and to highlight "not the episodic or sentimental, but 
a laconic monumentality, rigid rather than moving, enigmatic rather 
than familiar, obscure and weighty rather than smooth and polished." 5 
The essential traits of the new attitude were well described as distance, 
otherness, loftiness, monumentality, a laconic quality, and the revulsion 
against ail that is warm proximity, humanity, effusiveness, expression- 
ism; the line of objectivity in figures, of coolness and grandeur in forms. 

But apart from art, we are dealing with the general elements of a 
conduct and sentiment of existence, because the thesis that art stands 
among the supreme capabilities of man and reveals the essence of the 
universe rightly appeared to these writers as tired and anachronistic. 
The love of clarity is part of the style of objectivity: "Better ugly and 
clear, than beautiful and veiled." 6 The world must return to its stable, 
calm, clear, and naked state. "In the last analysis, even the life of the 
soul has value for us only as a thing, as a given of existence, with equal 
characteristics of objectivity and fatality," 7 wrote Matzke. "Rather than 
looking at the world from the point of view of the soul, we look at the 
soul from the point of view of the world. 8 And then everything seems to 
us clearer, more natural, more evident, and that which is merely subjec- 
tive appears to us ever more irrelevant and laughable." 9 

Between the two world wars, functional architecture received 
impulses from currents analogous to those of the Neue Sacblicbkeit. 
The theme of a new classicism generally surfaced in them, understood 
precisely in the sense of a tendency toward form and simplification, 
toward a linear and essential "Doricism," affirmed in opposition to 
the arbitrariness, fantasy, and "gracefulness" of the preceding art of 
bourgeois individualism. One may also recall in France the so-called 
esprit nouveau that was closely related to the exponents of functional 
architecture. And at the time when Bontempelli launched his "nove- 
centismo," 10 a parallel demand, though on a merely dilettantish plane 
of literati and unrealized intentions, was proclaimed in Italy. Then 
Bontempelli opposed to "the romantic era, that lasted from Jesus Christ 
to the Ballets Russes" (!) the new era, which was supposed to unfold 



Destructions and Liberations in the New Realism 117 

under the sign of a magical realism and a new classicism, just as others 
were speaking of the new Doricism of the skyscraper era, of white metal 
and crystal. 

Despite its limited pertinence to our concerns, this motive of a new 
realism contains values that are susceptible to transposition onto a 
higher, spiritual plane, in view of the task of turning what one experi- 
ences in the modern world into something positive. There are objective 
processes today that certainly involve an impoverishment compared to 
the preceding world of the individual and the person, and to its sur- 
vival. But in him who can maintain the inner tension proper to the 
transcendent dimension, such an impoverishment may acquire the posi- 
tive value of a simplification and essentialization of being, in a spiritual 
world in dissolution. 

I have treated the new realism with the reservation that what is of 
value in it is generally out of sight. But now that this is pointed out, it 
is best to draw a clear demarcation between the realism that may con- 
tain this potential significance, and its subproducts of neoreaiism and 
Marxist realism that belong to the ambitus of pure nihilism, not least 
because there have been collusions between the different types. 

Generally speaking, the second type has manifested almost exclu- 
sively in the domain of art and literary criticism, and as a function of 
politics. It is hardly worth dwelling on the neoreaiism that surfaced after 
World War II. It was characterized by the tendency in the artistic field 
to present as human reality only the most trivial and wretched sides of 
existence, mostly relating to the lowest and most vulnerable social strata. 
The whole pose exhausted itself in a single phase; it appeared wanting in 
any dimension of depth, even virtual depth, and served as a sophisticated 
formula for certain intellectuals disguised as common folk. When it was 
not reiterating banalities about the pathos of wretched people, it often 
took pleasure in ugliness and in masochism, in the complacent depiction 
of everything most abject, corrupt, and defeated in man. There is a whole 
genre of novels, unnecessary to name by title, in which this tendency 
appears undisguised, sometimes in combination with the most irrational 
and dark side of existentialism. That which in actual life is only a sector 
of a complex reality is here characterized as reality itself: a misrepresenta- 
tion too obvious to require further comment. 



118 Dissolution of the Individual 

More noteworthy is the tendentious use made of something that is 
less a realism than a narrow-ranged verismo on the part of the Marxist 
"new realism," which realistically depicts the negative aspects of exis- 
tence for purposes of propaganda and sociopolitical action, starting 
from the well-known formula that "the damage done to humanity is 
the consequence of the bourgeois and capitalistic socioeconomic struc- 
ture." We have already mentioned the kind of "human integrity" that is 
offered as an alternative: it is that of Nietzsche's "last man," a human 
integrity traded for that which might suit socialized cattle* The corre- 
sponding realism and anti-idealism is to be judged accordingly. Its anti- 
bourgeois and anti-individualist polemic takes for granted a regression 
of the human unit to a purely collective ("social") existence determined 
by material and economic values: a regression that is given out to be an 
"integration" and a "new proletarian humanism," (At one point Lukacs 
lets slip its true name, when he speaks of "plebeian humanism.") Here 
realism seems to be synonymous with a banal primitivism, which we 
have mentioned as the formula for one type of existential anesthetiza- 
tion in the world where God is dead. 

The truth, as we know, is that the realism in question draws its 
specific character from the theory of historical materialism and from 
other conceptions that, while they aspire to being objective and scien- 
tific, in fact contain just as much "mythology" and mere social ideol- 
ogy as is found in those great despised words, written in capital letters, 
of bourgeois idealism. Words of this kind are not eliminated from the 
underpinnings of the Marxist new realism, but replaced by others of 
a still lower level; they form the center of a mystic nihilism sui generis 
through their translation into energized ideas, made to work on the 
subinteliectual strata of the masses. This is enough to deprive Marxist 
realism of any "realistic" character, and to show that it is far from hav- 
ing reached the zero point of values. That zero point may become the 
start of a clear, detached, objective vision of existence, and of a positive, 
existential incapacity to submit to "myths" of any kind whatsoever. This 
last trait belongs rather to the deepest demand of the "new realism" dis- 
cussed above, the Neue Sachlichkett and kindred tendencies, in which 
we can find something of positive value from our point of view. It is a 




Destructions and Liberations in the New Realism 119 



simplification that may well involve an impoverishment and a lack of 
colorfulness compared to the "values of the person," but that does not 
necessarily descend to a lower level, and that may give rise to a kind of 
conduct in the free man that fits the objective structures of the contem- 
porary world. 



f ? 



18 
The "Animal Ideal 



9? 



The Sentiment of Nature 



The transcendent dimension may also become active in reaction to 
the processes responsible for a steady erosion of many ties to nature, 
leading to a rootless state. It is evident, for example, that the stay-at- 
home bourgeois lifestyle is increasingly and irreversibly affected by the 
progress of communication technology, opening up great expanses on 
land, sea, and air. Modern life takes place ever less in a protected, self- 
contained, qualitative, and organic environment: one is immersed in 
the entire world by new and rapid travel that can bring us to faraway 
lands and landscapes in little time. Hence, we tend toward a general 
cosmopolitanism as "world citizens" in a material and objective sense, 
not an ideological, much less a humanitarian one. At least the times of 
"provincialism" are over. 

To see what positive effect such situations can have on the devel- 
opment of the differentiated and self-possessed man, it is enough to 
glance at the ideas of certain traditional spiritual disciplines. In them, 
the metaphysical idea of the transience of earthly existence and the 
detachment from the world have had two characteristic expressions, 
whether symbolic or actual: the first in hermit life, living alone in 
desert or forest, the second in the wandering life, going through the 
world without house or home. This second type has even occurred in 
some Western religious orders; ancient Buddhism had the characteristic 
concept of "departure," as the start of a nonprofane existence, and in 
traditional Hinduism this was the last of the four stages of life. There is 
a significant analogy with the idea of the medieval "knight errant," to 
which we might add the enigmatic and sometimes disconcerting figures 



120 



The "Animal Ideal" 121 

of "noble travelers" whose homeland was unknown, who did not have 
one, or must not be asked about it. 

Although our case is different from that of ascetics who remove 
themselves from the world, the situation of the latest technological civi- 
lization might offer the incentive for commitments of this kind. In a 
large city, in mass society, among the almost unreal swarming of face- 
less beings, an essential sense of isolation or of detachment often occurs 
naturally, perhaps even more than in the solitude of moors and moun- 
tains. What I have hinted at concerning recent technology that annihi- 
lates distances and the planetary spread of today's horizons, feeds inner 
detachment, superiority, calm transcendence, while acting and moving 
in the vast world: one finds oneself everywhere, yet at home nowhere. 1 
In this way, the negative can again be turned into positive. The experi- 
ence increasingly offered, and often imposed on our contemporaries, 
of going to other cities, across frontiers, even to other continents, out- 
side the sphere of a secure existence with its peculiarities can be banal, 
matter-of-fact, touristic, utilitarian, and in our day almost always is. 
Alternatively, it can be an integrated part of a different, liberated life, 
with a more profound meaning in the above-mentioned terms, but only 
if the proper capacity of reaction is present in oneself. 

Given that the speed factor has an essential role in the modern, tech- 
nical mastery of distances, a passing allusion could be made to the value 
of the experience of speed itself. It is well known that today it is used by 
many men, and even women, almost like alcohol, to obtain a physical 
intoxication that feeds an essentially physical I, needing distraction from 
unpleasant thoughts and drugging itself with strong emotions. 2 

Like the machine itself, some situations of speed in the technolo- 
gized world can have a virtual, symbolic, and realizable dimension, 
often involving risk: the greater the speed, the more it requires a supe- 
rior lucidity, bringing into play a higher type of calmness and internal 
immobility* In this context the intoxication of speed can even change 
its nature; it can pass from one plane to another and have some traits in 
common with the type of intoxication of which I have spoken describ- 
ing the state of integrated Dionysism. If this were the proper place, I 
could develop this theme much further* 

Returning to what was mentioned earlier, the expression "nomad 



122 Dissolution of the Individual 

of the asphalt," although scathing, is significant of the negative and 
depersonalizing effect on life of the destruction of natural ties in large, 
modern cities. Also in this regard, I am not concerned with those forms 
of revolt or protest that, with the idea of defending "human values," 
end up going "back to nature," starting from the antitheses between 
city and nature, between "civilization" and nature. That theme already 
belonged to the nineteenth-century bourgeois repertory. But today it 
occurs in the context of what we might call the "physical" primitiviza- 
tion of existence. 

Here is one effect of that regression, through which in the course of 
his "liberation" Western man has come to feel ever less as a privileged 
being of creation, and ever more as one of so many natural species — 
^ven as an animal The defining and spread of Darwinism and evolu- 
tionism were already barometric indicators of this inner attitude. But 
apart from the domain of theories and science, in the field of ordi- 
nary, modern life, it has manifested in terms of behavior, giving rise to 
what has been called the "animal ideal," especially referring to North 
America, where it was first realized. 

The term applies to that ideal of biological well-being, comfort, 
optimistic euphoria emphasizing everything that is sheer health, youth, 
physical vigor, security, and material success, primitive satisfaction of 
hunger and sexual desire, athletic life, and so forth, whose counter- 
part is the atrophy of every superior form of sensibility and interest. I 
have already treated this, 3 The kind of man who is thus elevated to the 
summit of "modern" civilization is evidently one who has developed 
only the aspects through which he belongs to an animal species. It goes 
without saying that this idea finds its counterpart in the nihilism that 
underlies many of today's predominant sociopolitical currents. Here I 
only want to emphasize the "back to nature" idea as an instance of the 
physical cult of the personality. 

It is not a matter of mere forms, legitimate but banal, of organic 
compensation. It is no wonder that today's man feels a need for physical 
reintegration, relaxation of nerves, and invigoration of the body away 
from the environment of large, modern cities. For this reason, natural 
living, the culture of the body, and even certain types of individual sport 
may be useful. Things appear otherwise, however, when people start to 



f- 



The "Animal Ideal" 123 

claim that some kind of spiritual factor is involved; that is, when it is 
thought that natural surroundings and physical strength make a man 
feel closer to himself than in the experiences and tensions of civilized 
life, and above all when it is supposed that physical sensations of well- 
being and comfort have any profound significance, or anything to do 
with human integrity considered from a higher point of view. 

Apart from that position, which leads to the "animal ideal" and 
modern naturalism, I deplore the general confusion of a "return to ori- 
gins" with a return to Mother Earth and even to Nature. Although it 
has often been misapplied, that theological doctrine that holds that a 
purely natural state for man has never existed is still legitimate; at the 
beginning he was placed in a supranatural state from which he has 
now fallen. In fact, for the true type of man, it can never be a question 
of those origins and that "mother" wherein the individual cannot dif- 
ferentiate himself from his fellow men, or even from the animals. Every 
return to nature is a regressive phenomenon, including any protest in 
the name of instinctual rights, the unconscious, the flesh, life uninhib- 
ited by the intellect, and so forth. The man who becomes "natural" in 
this way has in reality become denatured. 

Here I must return to an earlier point: a consequence of rejecting 
this view is the overcoming of the antithesis between city and nature in 
the behavior that should be "natural" for the human type who concerns 
us. It is the attitude of him who feels in place as little in nature as in 
the city, for whom it is normal and honest in a higher sense to keep his 
distance with respect to both; he sees the need and pleasure of surren- 
der, expatiation, and feeling in animal, physical terms as an evasion, a 
symptom of fatigue and internal inconsistency. The body is part of the 
"person" as a definite instrument of expression and action in the situa- 
tion actually lived; therefore it is obvious that one must also extend to 
it discipline and control, in order to assure completeness of being. This, 
however, has nothing to do with the cult of the physical personality, 
much less with the mania for sports, especially for team sports, one of 
today's most vulgar and widespread opiates of the masses. 

As for the "sentiment of nature," in general, the human type that 
concerns us must consider nature as part of a larger and more objective 
whole: nature for him includes countrysides, mountains, forests, and 



124 Dissolution of the Individual 

seacoasts, but also dams, turbines, and foundries, the tentacular system 
of ladders and cranes of a great modern port or a complex of functional 
skyscrapers. This is the space for a higher freedom. He remains free and 
self- aware before both types of nature — being no less secure in the mid- 
dle of a steppe or on an alpine peak than amid Western city nightlife. 

The counterpart of the "animal ideal" occurs when the senti- 
ment of nature and landscape is made banal. This was already the 
case with idyllic nature, which was made into a myth in the period of 
the Encyclopedic and by Rousseau. Later, along these lines, there was 
the nature beloved by the bourgeois: Arcadian or lyric nature charac- 
terized by beauty and grace, by the picturesque, the restful, by that 
which inspires "noble sentiments"; nature with its brooks and groves, 
the romance of sunset and the pathos of moonlight; nature to which 
one declaims verses, weaves idylls, and evokes the poets who speak of 
"beautiful souls," Though sublimated and dignified, the mood immor- 
talized by Beethoven's Pastorale is no different. 

In the end, the phase of nature for the plebeians arrives, with the 
breakout of the masses, the common people everywhere with or with- 
out their automobiles, the travel agencies, the dopolavori? and all the 
rest; nothing is spared. The naturists and nudists form the extreme of 
this phenomenon. The beaches — teeming insect-like with thousands 
and thousands of male and female bodies, offering to the glance an 
insipid, almost complete nudity — are another symptom. Still another 
is the assault on the mountains by cable cars, funiculars, chair lifts, 
and ski lifts. All this is part of the regime of final disintegration of our 
epoch. There is no point in dwelling on it. 

I prefer to clarify the function that authentic contact with nature 
can have for the active, impersonal attitude, starting with some notions 
along the lines of the Neue Sachlichkeit, which can only acquire a full 
significance in our differentiated human type. 

Matzke said of this: "Nature is the great realm of things, which 
demands nothing of us, which neither pursues us nor asks for sentimen- 
tal reactions, which stands mutely before us as a world to itself, exter- 
nal and alien. This is exactly what we need . ♦ . this reality, always 
grand and distant, resting in itself, beyond all the little joys and the 
little sorrows of man. A world of objects, enclosed in itself, in which we 



The "Animal Ideal" 125 

ourselves feel like an object. Completely detached from everything 
merely subjective, from every personal vanity and nullity: this is what 
nature is for us/' 5 It is a question of restoring to nature — to space, to 
things, to landscape — those characteristics of distance and foreignness 
to mankind that were hidden in the epoch of individualism, when man 
projected his feelings, his passions, his lyrical ardor, onto reality to 
make it closer to him. It is a question of rediscovering the language of 
the inanimate that cannot manifest until the "soul" has ceased to 
impose itself on things. 

This is the sense in which nature can speak to us of transcen- 
dence. Our attention automatically shifts from some principal aspects 
of nature to others that are more propitious for opening us up to 
the nonhuman and the nonindividual. Nietzsche also spoke of the 
"superiority" of the inorganic world, calling it "spirituality without 
individuality." For a "supreme clarification of existence" he refers 
as an analogy to the "pure atmosphere of the Alps and ice fields, 
where there are no more clouds or veils, where the elementary quali- 
ties of things are revealed naked and uncompromising but with abso- 
lute intelligibility" and one hears "the immense, ciphered language 
of existence," "the doctrine of becoming made stone." 6 To return 
the world to a calm, stable, clear, and cool state; to restore to it its 
elementarity, its self-contained grandeur — this was also said to be the 
demand of the "new objectivity." Here prominence was justly given 
not to insensibility, but to a different kind of sensibility. Also for us, 
it is a matter of a human type whom nature no longer interests by 
offering him what is "artistic," rare, characteristic; he who no longer 
seeks in nature the "beauty" that merely feeds confused nostalgias 
and speaks to fantasy. For this human type, there can be no land- 
scape more beautiful than another, but some landscapes can be more 
distant, boundless, calm, cool, harsh, and primordial than others. He 
hears the language of things of the world not among trees, brooks, 
beautiful gardens, before oleographic sunsets and romantic moon- 
light, but rather in deserts, rocks, steppes, glaciers, murky Nordic 
fjords, the implacable, tropical sun, great ocean currents — in fact, in 
everything primordial and inaccessible. It naturally follows that the 
man with this sentiment of nature relates to it more actively — almost 



126 Dissolution of the Individual 

by absorbing its own pure, perceived force — than in a vague, lax, and 
rambling contemplation. 

If for the bourgeois generation nature was a kind of idyllic Sunday 
interlude of small-town life, and if for the latest generation it is the 
stage for acting out its vacuous, invasive, and contaminating vulgarity, 
it is for our differentiated man a school of objectivity and distance; it is 
something fundamental in his sense of existence, exhibiting an absolute 
character. At this point one can clearly speak of a nature that in its 
elementarity is the great world where the stone and steel panoramas of 
the metropolis, the endless avenues, the functional complexes of indus- 
trial areas are on the same level, for example, as great, solitary forests 
as symbols of a fundamental austerity, objectivity, and impersonality. 



With regard to the problems of inner orientation in our epoch, I have 
always valued ideas present in traditional esoteric doctrines. This also 
applies to what I have just said. The liberation of nature from the human, 
the access to it through the language of silence and the inanimate seems 
congenial to one who would turn the objective, destructive processes 
of the modern world to his own advantage. But the direction is no dif- 
ferent from that which schools of traditional wisdom, like Zen, knew 
through a real cleansing and transparency of the glance or an opening 
of the eye, an enlightening revelation of the consciousness that has over- 
come the fetters of the physical I, of the person, and his values. 

The result here is an experience that already belongs to a different 
level from that of ordinary consciousness. It does not exactly concern 
the matter of this book, but it is still interesting to point out its relation- 
ship with the vision of the world centered on free immanence, which 
was mentioned in an earlier chapter (in which a fleeting allusion to 
Zen itself was made) and which I now reconsider as the limit of a new 
realism. Ancient tradition has a saying: "The infinitely distant is the 
return." Among the maxims of Zen that point in the same direction 
is the statement that the "great revelation," acquired through a series 
of mental and spiritual crises, consists in the recognition that "no one 
and nothing 'extraordinary' exists in the beyond"; only the real exists. 
Reality is, however, lived in a state in which "there is no subject of the 
experience nor any object that is experienced," and under the sign of a 



The "Animal Ideal" 127 

type of absolute presence, "the immanent making itself transcendent 
and the transcendent immanent." The teaching is that at the point at 
which one seeks the Way, one finds oneself further from it, the same 
being valid for the perfection and "realization" of the self. The cedar 
in the courtyard, a cloud casting its shadow on the hills, falling rain, a 
flower in bloom, the monotonous sound of waves: all these "natural" 
and banal facts can suggest absolute illumination, the satori. As mere 
facts they are without meaning, finality, or intention, but as such they 
have an absolute meaning. Reality appears this way, in the pure state of 
"things being as they are," The moral counterpart is indicated in say- 
ings such as: "The pure and immaculate ascetic does not enter nirvana^ 
and the monk who breaks the rules does not go to hell," or: "You have 
no liberation to seek from bonds, because you have never been bound." 7 
The extent that these peaks of the inner life can be attained, in the 
framework already indicated, remains undetermined. I merely wish to 
point out a convergence of themes and a direction. 



Part 5 



Dissolution of 
Consciousness 
and Relativism 



19 

The Procedures 
of Modern Science 



One of the principal justifications for Western civilization believing 
itself, since the nineteenth century, to be the civilization par excellence 
is natural science. Based on the myth of this science, preceding civiliza- 
tions were judged to be obscurantist and infantile; prey to superstitions 
and to metaphysical and religious whims. Apart from a few casual dis- 
coveries, they were ignorant of the path of true knowledge, which can 
be reached only with the positive, mathematical-experimental methods 
developed in the modern era. Science and knowledge have been made 
synonymous with experimental "positive science," while the epithet 
"prescientific" has come to signify a disqualification beyond appeal of 
any other type of knowledge. 

The apogee of the myth of physical science coincided with that 
of the bourgeois era, when positivist and materialist scientism was in 
favor. Then there was talk of a crisis of science, and an internal critique 
occurred, resulting in a new phase inaugurated by Einstein's theory. As 
an offshoot of this, the scientistic myth has revived recently with an 
appraisal of scientific knowledge that in certain cases has had curious 
developments. Among them, it is claimed that the latest science, having 
now passed the phase of materialism and cleared the field of old, use- 
less speculations, has reconciled its conclusions about the nature of the 
universe with metaphysics, presenting themes and views that agree with 
the certainties of philosophy, and for some, even of religion. Besides 
the popularizers of Reader's Digest, certain scientists like Eddington, 
Planck, and even Einstein have made informal pronouncements of this 
kind. Hence there is a kind of euphoria, confirmed by the prospects of 



130 



The Procedures of Modem Science 131 

the atomic era and the "second industrial revolution," whose very point 
of departure was modern physics. 

All these are only developments of one of the great illusions of the 
modern world, one of the mirages of an epoch in which, in reality, the 
dissolving processes have besieged the field of knowledge itself. In order 
to realize this, it is enough to look beyond the facade. If it is not a mat- 
ter of popularizers, but of the scientists themselves, and if it is not a case 
like the knowing smiles between mystifying augurs, which Cicero speaks 
of, it reveals a naivete that only an unequaled limitation of horizons and 
intellectual interests could explain. 

None of modern science has the slightest value as knowledge; rather, 
it bases itself on a formal renunciation of knowledge in the true sense. 
The driving and organizing force behind modern science derives noth- 
ing at all from the ideal of knowledge, but exclusively from practical 
necessity, and, I might add, from the will to power turned on things 
and on nature. I do not mean its technical and industrial applications, 
even though the masses attribute the prestige of modern science above 
all to them, because there they see irrefutable proof of its validity. It is 
a matter of the very nature of scientific methods even before their tech- 
nical applications, in the phase known as "pure research." In fact, the 
concept of "truth" in the traditional sense is already alien to modern 
science, which concerns itself solely with hypotheses and formulae that 
can predict with the best approximation the course of phenomena and 
relate them to a certain unity. And as it is not a question of "truth," 
but a matter less of seeing than of touching, the concept of certainty 
in modern science is reduced to the "maximum probability." That all 
scientific certainties have an essentially statistical character is openly 
recognized by every scientist, and more categorically than ever in recent 
subatomic physics. The system of science resembles a net that draws 
ever tighter around a something that, in itself, remains incomprehen- 
sible, with the sole intention of subduing it for practical ends. 

These practical ends only secondarily concern the technical appli- 
cations; they constitute the criterion in the very domain that belongs to 
pure knowledge, in the sense that here, too, the basic impulse is sche- 
matizing, an ordering of phenomena in a simpler and more manageable 
way. As was rightly noted, ever since that formula simplex sigillum veri 



132 Dissolution of Consciousness and Relativism 

(simplicity is the seal of the true), there has appeared a method that 
exchanges for truth (and knowledge) that which satisfies a practical, 
purely human need of the intellect. In the final analysis, the impulse 
to know is transformed into an impulse to dominate; and we owe to a 
scientist, Bertrand Russell, the recognition that science, from being a 
means to know the world, has become a means to change the world. 

I will not dwell further on these commonplace considerations, 
Epistemology, that is, reflection applied to the methods of scientific 
research, has honestly recognized all of them already, with Bergson, 
Leroy, Poincare, Meyerson, Brunschvicg, and many others, to say 
nothing of what Nietzsche himself had seen perfectly well. They have 
brought to light the altogether practical and pragmatic character of sci- 
entific methods. The more "comfortable" ideas and theories become 
"true," in regard to the organization of the data of sensorial experience. 
A choice between such data is made consciously or instinctively, exclud- 
ing systematically those that do not lend themselves to being controlled; 
thus also everything qualitative and unrepeatable that is not susceptible 
to being mathematized. 

Scientific "objectivity" consists solely in being ready at any moment 
to abandon existing theories or hypotheses, as soon as the chance 
appears for the better control of reality. Thereupon it includes in the 
system of the already predictable and manageable those phenomena not 
yet considered, or seemingly irreducible; and that, without any prin- 
ciple that in itself, in its intrinsic nature, is valid once and for all. In 
the same way, he who can lay his hands on a modern long-range rifle is 
ready to give up a flintlock. 

Based on the above, one can demonstrate that final form of disso- 
lution of knowledge corresponding to Einstein's theory of relativity. 
Only the profane, in hearing talk of relativity, could believe that the 
new theory had destroyed every certainty and almost sanctioned a 
kind of Pirandellian "thus it is, if you think so," In fact, it is quite a 
different matter, in the sense that this theory has brought us even closer 
to absolute certainties, but of a purely formal character. A coherent 
system of physics has been constructed to keep all relativity in check, 
to take every change and variation into account, with the greatest inde- 
pendence from points of reference and from everything bound to obser- 



The Procedures of Modern Science 133 

vations, to the evidence of direct experience, and to current perceptions 
of space, time, and speed. This system is "absolute" through the flexi- 
bility granted to it by its exclusively mathematical and algebraic nature. 
Thus once the "cosmic constant" is defined (according to the speed of 
light), the so-called transformation equations suffice to introduce a cer- 
tain number of parameters into the formulae used to account for phe- 
nomena in order to get over a certain "relativity" and to avoid any 
possible disproof from the facts of experience. 

A simpleminded example can make this state of affairs plain. 
Whether Earth moves around the Sun, or the Sun around Earth, from 
the point of view of Einstein's "cosmic constant" is more or less the same. 
One is no more "true" than the other, except that the second alternative 
would involve the introduction of many more elements to the formulae, 
thus a greater complication and inconvenience in the calculations. For 
the person unconcerned with one system being more complicated and 
inconvenient than another, the choice remains free; this person could cal- 
culate the various phenomena starting either from the premise that Earth 
revolves around the Sun, or from the opposite premise. 

This banal and elementary example clarifies the type of "certainty" 
and knowledge to which Einstein's theory leads. In that regard, it is 
important to point out that there is nothing new here, that his the- 
ory represents only the latest and most accessible manifestation of the 
characteristic orientation of all modern science. This theory, though far 
from common or philosophical relativism, is willing to admit the most 
unlikely relativities, but arms itself against them, so to speak, from the 
start. It intends to supply certainties that either leave out or anticipate 
them, and thus from the formal point of view are almost absolute. And 
if reality should ever revolt against them, a suitable readjustment of 
dimensions will restore these certainties. 

It would be good to look further into the kind and presuppositions 
of this "knowing." The cosmic constant is a purely mathematical con- 
cept; in using it to speak of the speed of light, one no longer imagines 
speed, light, or propagation, one must only have in mind numbers and 
symbols. If someone were to ask those scientists what is light, without 
accepting an answer in mathematical symbols, they would look stupe- 
fied and not even understand the request. Everything that in recent 



134 Dissolution of Consciousness and Relativism 

physics proceeds from that stronghold participates rigorously in its 
nature: physics is completely algebraized. With the introduction of the 
concept of a "multidimensional continuum" even that final sensible 
intuitive basis that survived in yesterday's physics in the pure, sche- 
matic, categories of geometrical space is reduced to mathematical for- 
mulae. Space and time here are one and the same; they form a 
"continuum," itself expressed by algebraic functions. Together with 
the current, intuitive notion of space and time, that of force, energy, 
and movement also disappears. For example, in terms of Einstein's 
physics the motion of a planet around the Sun only means that in the 
corresponding field of the space-time continuum there is a certain 
"curvature" — a term that, to be sure, cannot have made him imagine 
anything, dealing again with pure, algebraic values. The idea of a 
motion produced by a force is reduced to the bare bones of an abstract 
motion following the "shortest geodetic line," which in our universe 
would approximate an ellipse. As in this algebraic scheme nothing 
remains of the concrete idea of force, even less so can there be room 
for cause. The "spiritualization" alleged by the popularizers of mod- 
ern physics, due to the disappearance of the idea of matter and the 
reduction of the concept of mass to that of energy, is an absurdity, 
because mass and energy are made interchangeable values by an 
abstract formula. The only result of all this is a practical one: the 
application of the formula in order to control atomic forces. Apart 
from that, everything is consumed by the fire of algebraic abstraction 
associated with a radical experimentalism, that is, with a recording of 
simple phenomena. 

With quantum theory one has the impression of entering into a 
cabalistic world (in the popular meaning of the term). The paradoxi- 
cal results of the Michelson-Morley experiment provided the incentive 
for the formulation of Einstein's theory. Another paradox is that of the 
discontinuity and improbability discovered by nuclear physics through 
the process of expressing atomic radiations in numerical quantities. (In 
simple terms: it deals with the evidence that these quantities do not 
make up a continuous series; it is as if in the series of numbers, three 
were not followed by four, five, etc., but skipped to a different number, 
without even obeying the law of probability.) This new paradox has led 




The Procedures of Modern Science 135 

to a further algebraizing of the so-called mechanics of matrices, used 
to explain them away, beside a new and entirely abstract formulation 
of fundamental laws, like the energy constant, action and reaction, and 
so on. Here one has not only relinquished the law of causality, replac- 
ing it by statistical averages, because it seemed to have to do with pure 
chance; in addition, in the latest developments of this physics one sees 
the paradox of having to relinquish experimental proofs because their 
results were found to be variable. The very doing of an experiment 
allows that one may have one result now and another later, because 
the experiment itself influences the object; it alters it due to the interde- 
pendent values of "position" and "motion," and to any description of 
the subatomic phenomena another, just as "true," can be opposed. It is 
not the experiment, whose results through this method would remain 
inconclusive, but rather the pure, algebraic function, the so-called wave 
function, that serves to provide absolute values in this domain. 

According to one most recent theory, which integrates Einstein's 
relativity, purely mathematical entities that on the one hand magically 
spring forth in full irrationality, but on the other are ordered in a com- 
pletely formal system of algebraic "production," exhaustively account 
for everything that can be positively checked and formularized regard- 
ing the ultimate basis of sensible reality. This process was the intellec- 
tual background to the atomic era's inauguration — parallel, therefore, 
to the definitive liquidation of all knowledge in the proper sense. One 
of the principal exponents of modern physics, Heisenberg, has explic- 
itly admitted this in his book: it is about a formal knowledge enclosed 
in itself, extremely precise in its practical consequences, in which, how- 
ever, one cannot speak of knowledge of the real. For modern science, he 
says, "the object of research is no longer the object in itself, but nature 
as a function of the problems that man sets himself"; the logical conclu- 
sion in such science being that "henceforth man only meets himself." 

There is an aspect in which this latest natural science represents a 
type of inversion or counterfeit of that concept of catharsis, or purifica- 
tion, that in the traditional world was extended from the moral and 
ritual field to the intellectual; it referred to an intellectual discipline that, 
through overcoming the perceptions furnished by the animal senses and 
more or less mixed with the reactions of the I, would lead to a higher 



136 Dissolution of Consciousness and Relativism 

knowledge, to true knowledge. In effect, we have something similar in 
modern algebraized physics. Not only has it gradually freed itself from 
any immediate data of sense experience and common sense, but even 
from all that which imagination could offer as support. The current con- 
cepts of space, time, motion, and causality fall one by one, so to speak. 
Everything that can be suggested by the direct and living relationship of 
the observer to the observed is made unreal, irrelevant, and negligible. 
It is then like a catharsis that consumes every residue of the sensory, not 
in order to lead to a higher world, the "intelligible world" or a "world 
of ideas," as in the ancient schools of wisdom, but rather to the realm of 
pure mathematical thought, of number, of undifferentiated quantity, as 
opposed to the realm of quality, of meaningful forms and living forces: 
a spectral and cabalistic world, an extreme intensification of the abstract 
intellect, where it is no longer a matter of things or phenomena, but 
almost of their shadows reduced to their common denominator, gray 
and indistinguishable. One may well speak of a falsification of the eleva- 
tion of the mind above human sense-experience, which in the traditional 
world had as its effect not the destruction of the evidences of that expe- 
rience, but their integration: the potentizing of the ordinary, concrete 
perception of natural phenomena by also experiencing their symbolic 
and intelligible aspects. 



20 
Covering up Nature 

Phenomenology 



This, then, is the state of affairs: Modern science has led to a prodigious 
increase of information about phenomena in formerly unexplored or 
neglected fields, but in so doing it has not brought man any closer to 
the depths of reality, but has rather distanced and estranged him from 
them; and what nature "really" is, according to science, escapes any 
concrete intuition. From this point of view, the latest science has no 
advantage over earlier, materialistic science. The atoms of yesteryear 
and the mechanistic conception of the universe at least allowed one to 
represent something, in however primitive a fashion; but the entities of 
the latest mathematical physics serve to represent absolutely nothing. 
They are simply the stitches of a net that has been fabricated and per- 
fected not for the sake of knowing in a concrete, intuitive, and living 
sense — the only sense that would matter to an undegenerate human- 
ity — but in order to gain an ever greater power, yet still an external 
one, over nature, whose depths remain closed to man and as mysterious 
as ever. Nature's mysteries have simply been covered over, and atten- 
tion diverted from them by the spectacular successes of technology and 
industry, where one no longer tries to know the world, but to change it 
for the purposes of an earthbound humanity — following the program 
explicitly laid out by Karl Marx. 

I will repeat that it is a fraud to speak of a spiritual value in today's 
science, just because instead of matter, it talks about energy, or because 
it sees mass as "coagulated radiations" or a sort of "congealed light," 
and because it considers spaces of more than three dimensions. None 
of that has any existence outside the theories of specialists in purely 
abstract mathematical notions. When these notions are substituted for 



137 



138 Dissolution of Consciousness and Relativism 

those of earlier physics, they still change nothing of modern man's 
effective experience of the world. This substitution of one hypothesis 
for another does not concern real existence, but only interests minds 
given to pointless divagations. After it has been said that energy, not 
matter, exists, that we live not in a Euclidean, three-dimensional space 
but in a curved space of four or more dimensions, and so forth, things 
remain as they were; my actual experience has not changed a whit, and 
the significance of what I see — light, the sun, fire, seas, sky, flowering 
plants, dying beings — the ultimate significance of every process and 
phenomenon is no more transparent to me. One cannot begin to speak 
of transcendence, of a deepened knowledge in spiritual or truly intel- 
lectual terms. One can only speak of a quantitative extension of notions 
about other sectors of the external world, which aside from practical 
utility has only curiosity value. 

In every other respect, modern science has made reality more alien 
and inaccessible to men of today than it ever was in the era of material- 
ism and so-called classical physics. And it is infinitely more alien and 
inaccessible than it was to men of other civilizations and even to primi- 
tive peoples. It is a cliche that the modern scientific vision has desacral- 
ized the world, and the world desacralized by scientific knowledge has 
become one of the existential elements that make up modern man, all 
the more so to the degree that he is "civilized." Ever since he has been 
subject to compulsory education, his mind has been stuffed with "posi- 
tive" scientific notions; he cannot avoid seeing in a soulless light every- 
thing that surrounds him, and therefore acts destructively. What, for 
example, could the symbol of the sunset of a dynasty, like the Japanese, 
mean to him when he knows scientifically what the sun is: merely a star, 
at which one can even fire missiles. And what is left of Kant's pathetic 
appeal to "the starry sky above me," when one is educated by the latest 
astrophysics and its equations about the constitution of space? 

The boundary that defines the range of modern science from the 
very start, whatever its possible developments, appears in the fact that 
its constant and rigid point of departure has been and is based on 
the dualistic and exteriorized relationship between the I and the not- 
I, which is proper to simple sense-knowledge. This relationship is the 
immutable foundation of all modern science's edifices: all its instru- 




Covering up Nature 139 

ments are just like so many extensions, improvements, and refinements 
of the physical senses. They are not instruments of another kind of 
knowledge, that is, of true knowledge. Thus, for example, when mod- 
ern science introduces the idea of a fourth dimension, it is always as 
another dimension in the physical world, not as that of a perception 
that goes beyond physical experience. 

Given this basic situation of a limitation exalted to a method, one 
can well understand that the consequence of all scientific and techno- 
logical progress is an inner stagnation or even a return to savagery. 
Such progress is not accompanied by any inner progress but develops 
on a plane apart; it does not intersect with man's concrete, existential 
situation, which instead is left to itself. It is hardly worth mentioning 
the absurdity or the disarming naivete of that modern social ideology 
that makes science a sort of substitute for religion, giving it the task of 
showing man the way to happiness and progress, and sending him on 
that way. The truth is that man has gained nothing from the progress 
of science and technology, neither in regard to knowledge (and I have 
already spoken of that), nor in regard to his own power, and still less in 
regard to any higher law of conduct. At best, one could make an excep- 
tion for medicine, but still only on the physical level. As for power, let 
no one claim that the ability of the hydrogen bomb to destroy an entire 
metropolis, or the promise of nuclear energy that heralds the "second 
industrial revolution," or the games for grown-up children that are 
space exploration, have made a single person more potent and superior 
in himself, in his concrete being. These forms of a mechanical, external, 
and extrinsic power leave the real human being untouched; he is no 
more powerful or superior using space missiles than he ever was when 
using a club, except in its material effects; apart from those he remains 
as he was, with his passions, his instincts, and his inadequacies. 

As for the third point, the laws of action, obviously science has put 
at man's disposal a prodigious system of means, while leaving the prob- 
lem of ends altogether indeterminate. The image of the modern world's 
situation mentioned above is again appropriate: "A petrified forest, hav- 
ing chaos at its center." Some have tried to argue a finalistic view of 
the unprecedented accumulation of energy in the atomic era. Theodor 
Litt, for example, has suggested that man might realize his own nature 



140 Dissolution of Consciousness and Relativism 

in the face of a crisis situation by using his free will, deciding in full 
responsibility, taking the risk, in one direction or the other. Currently 
the decision is over the destructive and military use of atomic energy, or 
its "constructive," peaceful use. 

In an epoch of dissolution, such an idea seems completely abstract 
and fantastic, typical of intellectuals with no sense of reality. First it 
presupposes the existence of men who still possess an inner law and 
sure ideas about what course should really be followed — and this, 
beyond anything that relates to the purely material world. Second, it 
presumes that these hypothetical men are the very ones entrusted with 
the use of the new means of power, in one direction or the other. Both 
suppositions are chimerical, especially the second. Today's leaders are 
caught in a tangle of actions and reactions that evade any real control; 
they obey irrational, collective influences, and are almost always at the 
service of special interests, ambitions, and material and economic rival- 
ries that leave no room for a decision based on an enlightened freedom, 
a decision as an "absolute person." 

In fact, even the alternative suggested above, over which our con- 
temporaries agonize so much, may present itself in terms very different 
from those advanced by a pacifist, progressivist, moralizing humani- 
tarianism. I truly cannot say what the person who still has hope for 
man should think of the imminence of quasi-apocalyptic destruction. 
It would certainly force many to face the existential problem in all its 
nakedness, and subject them to extreme trials; but is this a worse evil 
than that of mankind's safe, secure, satisfied, and total consignment to 
the kind of happiness that befits Nietzsche's "last man": a comfortable 
consumer civilization of socialized human animals, aided by all the 
discoveries of science and industry and reproducing demographically in 
a squirming, catastrophic crescendo? 

These are the terms in which questions about modern science and 
its applications must clearly appear to the differentiated human type 
whom we have in mind. It remains to add a few considerations on the 
consequences that he can draw from this field for his own conduct. 
I will not dwell further on the world of technology, having already 
spoken of how the differentiated man can let it act on him. I have 
mentioned the machine as symbol; and among the challenges that may 



Covering up Nature 141 

serve, in crisis situations, to activate the transcendent dimension in 
him, we may also include everything that, after the total wars already 
experienced, the atomic era may hold for us, thanks to the "miracles of 
science." One need only emphasize that the state of affairs is given and 
irreversible, to be accepted and turned to one's own advantage, as one 
might do, for example, when faced with a cataclysm* Apart from that, 
my verdict on the intrinsic value of science and technology remains 
valid, and what I have said on the subject should be kept in mind. 

A different point of view may enter into consideration regarding 
the scientific method in itself. Modern science in no way reveals the 
essence of the world, and has nothing to do with real knowledge, but 
more often puts the seal on its dissolution. Still, scientific activity has 
an ideal of clarity, impersonality, objectivity, rigor, and the exclusion 
of personal sentiments, impulses, and preferences. The scientist thinks 
that he can exclude himself and let objects speak for themselves; he is 
concerned with "objective" laws that have no respect for what pleases 
or does not please the individual, and nothing to do with morality. 
Now, these are also traits of the realism that I have included among the 
elements valid for the integrated man. In classical antiquity, after all, 
mathematics was recognized as a discipline for cultivating intellectual 
clarity. The practical character with which I have reproached modern 
science does not prejudice this: I am speaking of the orientation or basic 
formula of every science of the modern type, and not of the direct and 
arbitrary interventions of individuals in the course of research that pro- 
ceeds on this basis, and that will not tolerate them. Scientific activity 
thus reflects in its own way something of that ascesis of active objectiv- 
ity mentioned earlier, having a symbolic value similar to that which the 
machine possesses on another plane. 

Anyone endowed with real clarity of vision, however, cannot fail to 
see the part played by irrational elements in the scientist's makeup, 
quite aside from his formal research methods, especially regarding his 
choice of hypotheses and interpretive theories. There is a substratum of 
which the modern scientist is unaware: a substratum in regard to which 
he is passive and subject to precise influences that originate in part from 
the forces that have shaped a civilization at one or another point of its 
cycle. In our case it is the terminal and twilight phase of the Western 



142 Dissolution of Consciousness and Relativism 

cycle. One gains a presentiment of how important this substratum is 
from the criticism of science and its "superstition of the fact" (as Guenon 
puts it 1 ), showing that the fact means little in itself, but that the essential 
factor is the system into which it fits and on whose basis it is inter- 
preted. This also indicates the limitations that prejudice the ideal of 
clarity and objectivity in the modern type of scientist. The secret and 
true history of modern science is still waiting to be written. 

It may seem contradictory that in the previous chapter I approved 
of an attitude of distance and the detachment of the I from things, 
whereas now I have disapproved of the dualistic system in which the I is 
juxtaposed to the not-I of the external world, nature, and phenomena, 
which is the basic premise of all modern science and also the origin of 
*a system where true knowledge is out of the question. This contradic- 
tion vanishes with insight into the inner formation, the attitude, and 
the possibilities of someone who faces things and nature after having 
ceased to project feelings and subjective, emotional, and imaginary 
contents onto them. It is because the inner being is extinct in the mod- 
ern scientist, leaving him with only gross physical perceptions and an 
abstract, mathematical intellect, that the relationship between the I and 
the not-I grows rigid and soulless, so that his detachment can only act 
negatively. His science is only good for grasping and manipulating the 
world, not for understanding it or for enlarging his knowledge in a 
qualitative way. 

As for the integrated man, his situation is quite different; the vision 
of naked reality imposes on him no limits of this kind. The very latest 
science, as in a reductio ad absurdum, has made painfully visible the 
characteristics belonging to all of modern science, which must therefore 
add up to a negative balance; but this signifies for him the end of equiv- 
ocation. He will put it aside as meaningless, abstract, and purely prag- 
matic, devoid of any interest or any "scientific" theory of the world. He 
will judge it, in Othmar Spann's words, as "knowledge of that which is 
not worth the trouble of knowing," Having made a tabula rasa, what 
remains is Nature, the world in its original state. Thus he arrives at a 
natural relationship, just as described at the end of chapter 19. Only in 
the present context, to dissipate completely the apparent contradiction, 
it is well to introduce a further idea: that of the multidimensional nature 



Covering up Nature 143 

of experience. This multidimensionality is quite distinct from the math- 
ematical and merely cerebral one of the latest physics. For a summary 
explanation I again follow the method of not referring directly (as well 
I might) to traditional teachings, but of examining one of the modern 
currents in which it is detectable as a sort of involuntary reflection. I 
will take for this the "phenomenological ontology" of Edmund Husserl, 
which has sometimes been confused with existentialism itself. 

Husserl's philosophy also seeks to liberate the direct experience 
of reality from all the theories, problems, apparently precise concepts, 
and practical ends that hide it from our minds; also from any abstract 
idea about what might be behind it, either in philosophical terms (like 
"essence" or Kant's "thing in itself") or in scientific ones. From the 
objective viewpoint, this almost revives the Nietzschean aspiration to 
banish any "beyond," any "other world," while from the correspond- 
ing subjective viewpoint, it revives the ancient principle of the epocbe, 
that is, the suspension of any judgment, any individual interpretation, 
any application of concepts and predicates to experience. In addition, 
one seeks to overcome all current opinion, the sense of false familiarity, 
false obviousness, and habit that one may have about things, in short 
everything that has overlaid the primordial surprise in the face of the 
world. That is the initial phase. 

Next, one is meant to let the facts or "presences" of experience 
speak for themselves, in direct relation to the I. The phenomenological 
school uses the unfortunate term of "intentionality" for this relation, 
whereas it is really the opposite of any intention in the current sense: 
(See chapter 18, where it is explained that at this degree there cannot be 
any more "intentions," either in reality or in the I.) 

I must explain here what the movement in question really means by 
the "phenomenon" from which it takes its name. It has restored the 
original meaning to the word, connected to a Greek verb that means to 
be manifested or revealed. Thus it is supposed to mean "that which is 
directly manifested," that which is offered directly as a content of con- 
sciousness. It is far removed from the usage of the term "phenomenon" 
prevalent in modern philosophy, where the phenomenon has been given 
an implicitly or overtly denigratory meaning, for instance, that of a 
"mere phenomenon" as opposed to what really is, or as hiding what 



144 Dissolution of Consciousness and Relativism 

really is: on the one hand is being, on the other appearance, the "world 
of phenomena." This antithesis is now rejected, with the idea that being 
can manifest itself as it truly is, in its essence and its significance. Hence 
the expression "phenomenological ontology" (that is, the doctrine of 
being, based on the phenomenon) is not a contradiction in terms. 
"Beyond the phenomena as phenomenology understands them, there 
can be nothing else," 

The next stage is to explain that, if being is not hidden but mani- 
fested in the phenomenon, such manifestation has various degrees. 
The lowest is the obtuse, opaque state of simple sensible presences. But 
a "disclosing" (Erschliessung) of the phenomenon is possible, which 
may relate in a certain way to the idea I have mentioned of the living 
pluridimensionality of the real. Knowing, from the point of view of 
phenomenology, means to proceed with this disclosure: a procedure 
that, however, is not logical or inductive, scientific, or philosophical. If 
anything, Husserl's idea of what is involved reproduces — even plagia- 
rizes — a traditional teaching. His "reduction" (a technical term of this 
school) or "phenomenological destruction" with regard to the external 
world is, as I have said, the stripping of all the conceptual and dis- 
cursive accretions that cover up the pure and direct experience. When 
applied to the inner world, this "reduction" or "destruction" is said to 
lead, as though to an altogether original element, to the perception of 
the pure I, or, as Husserl calls it, the "transcendent I." This would con- 
stitute that one point of certainty, that original evidence, already sought 
by Descartes after doubting everything else. Using our terminology, 
this element or residuum that is left after applying phenomenological 
reduction to the inner world, and that manifests nakedly, is the "being" 
within us, the superindividual "Self." It is a center of clear and immo- 
bile light, a pure luminous source. When its light is projected onto phe- 
nomena, it determines their disclosure, that is, it reveals in them a more 
profound dimension, the "living presence" that the phenomenologists 
also call "the immanent content of meaning" (immanenter Sinngehalt). 
Thereupon the inner and the outer meet. 

There is a further aspect of phenomenology that at least pretends to 
reflect a traditional view. One is supposed to overcome the antithesis or 
hiatus that usually exists between the data of direct experience and its 



Covering up Nature 145 

significances. The school in question seeks to distinguish itself both from 
the irrational and vitalistic, and from the positivistic and empirical 
schools. What remains in those schools, after they have made a tabula 
rasa after their fashion, is the simple, "positive," sensible reality (the 
point of departure for correspondingly "positivist" science), or the pure 
experience lived as something instinctive, irrational, and subintellectual. 
In contrast, the disclosure or animation of the phenomenon when the 
light of the Self, of Being, is projected onto it causes to appear in the 
phenomenon itself, as its ultimate essence, something one might call 
"intellectual" (intelligible), if intellectuality did not nowadays mean that 
which belongs to the rational and abstract mind. One can clarify the 
idea by saying that what intervenes, beyond the stage of direct experi- 
ence, certainly, but disanimate and opaque, is a "vision of the sense of 
things as a presence" "Understanding coincides with vision, intuition 
(direct perception) with meaning." Whereas normally the world is given 
us in the form of sensible presences ("phenomena") without significance, 
or else as merely subjective meanings (ideas of thought) without a sensi- 
ble presence (without a real intuitive basis), the two things are supposed 
to coincide in the "phenomenological deepening" on the plane of a 
higher objectivity. In this way, phenomenology does not present itself as 
irrationalism or positivism, but as an "eidetics"; a knowledge of intel- 
lectual essences. It aims toward an "intellectual" transparency of the 
real, of which naturally there are very different degrees. 

When medieval philosophers spoke of intuitio intellectualis (intel- 
lectual intuition), they were not referring to anything different. On the 
whole, and keeping strictly to the essential points that have been raised 
so far, and to the way in which I have raised them, the assumptions 
of phenomenology would seem to correspond to those that I have for- 
mulated. Nevertheless, such a correspondence between the phenom- 
enologists' motives and traditional teachings is superficial and illusory, 
though as I have said, one sometimes wonders whether it is a case of 
plagiarism pure and simple. The phenomenological school of Husserl 
and his followers deals with simple philosophy; it is like the parody of 
things belonging to an absolutely different world. The whole of phe- 
nomenology, being the invention of modern thinkers and academic spe- 
cialists, has as its sole basis the existential plane of modern man, for 



146 Dissolution of Consciousness and Relativism 

whom the disclosure of phenomena, that is, the concrete, living pluridi- 
mensionality of the real presented in its nakedness (Nietzsche would say 
in its "innocence") is and must be mere fancy. Everything in this school 
is confined to more or less abstruse books, with the usual vain critical 
examinations of various systems of the history of profane philosophy, 
with logical analyses and the usual fetishism for "philosophy," not to 
mention the mixture of the valid motives that I have isolated here with 
many suspect ideas. Among the latter are the significance attributed to 
time, to history, and to becoming; the misuse of the term Lebenswelt 
(world of living) for that of pure experience; another misuse, already 
mentioned, of the concept of "intentionality"; the naive and irrelevant 
pictures of a world of "harmony" and "rationality," and so forth. But 
this is not the place for a critical analysis or any further discrimination, 
given that phenomenology has served us no better or worse than exis- 
tentialism as a simple, incidental point of reference. 

I have now pointed out a direction, and the only direction possible 
once one has realized the great illusion and the spiritual irrelevancy of 
everything that passes for "knowledge" today, at the end of a cycle. I 
repeat: This direction was well known to the traditional world, and 
anyone with the chance of referring to it directly can do perfectly well 
without Husserl and all the rest. Thus he will avoid from the start the 
error of "mistaking the finger pointing to the moon for the moon itself," 
to use a Far Eastern expression. "Phenomenological destruction" rig- 
orously applied cannot spare phenomenology itself; and one can say 
the same of this recently fashionable movement as of the others of our 
time: yw, entendu, interre (seen, heard/understood, buried). Nothing 
has changed: we have not arrived at any real transcendence. 

In traditional teachings, the symbol of the eye in the middle of the 
forehead, whose glance burns up all appearances, corresponds precisely 
to the idea of "phenomenological destruction," Similarly, the traditional 
esoteric doctrine concerning the multiple states of the being has always 
admitted an "essence" or a "being" that is not the hypothetical coun- 
terpart, purely thought or believed in, of the phenomena, but the object 
of an "intellectual" experience as direct as the common sensorial type. 
The same doctrine also speaks, not of an "other reality" but of other 
experienceable dimensions of the one reality. Incidentally, the so-called 



Covering up Nature 147 

symbolic conception of the cosmos has the same significance: it is the 
pluridimensionality of the degrees of significance that reality may pres- 
ent in a differentiated experience, obviously conditioned by the nature 
of the experiencer (at whose limit there may be that which Husserl calls 
the "transcendental I"). The final dimension of the object of such an 
experience might correspond to the views of Zen Buddhism that I have 
mentioned: pure reality that acquires an absolute meaning just as it is, 
when it knows no goals, when no intentions are attributed to it, when it 
has no need of justifications or proofs, and manifests the transcendent 
as immanent. 

I have already treated the echo of such views in Nietzsche's and 
Jaspers' ideas about the "language of the real." But it is as well to repeat 
that in speaking of these ideas in order to warn of their errors and offer 
alternatives, I do not mean to present any of this as an actual possibil- 
ity, either for my contemporaries in general, or even for the type of 
man I always have in mind. One cannot ignore everything that modern 
progress and culture have created, and that is now an established fact 
in modern man's makeup, largely neutralizing the faculties necessary 
for an effective "opening" of the experience of things and beings — an 
opening that has nothing to do with the philosophical lucubrations of 
today's phenomenologists. 

The sensation of the current dissolution of knowledge and of the 
character of that which now passes as knowledge may be a helpful 
premise; but to go any further, the essential thing is not a simple mental 
orientation but an inner awakening. Given that throughout this book I 
have chosen not to consider the differentiated type who wants to, and 
can, isolate himself from the modern world, but one who lives in the 
thick of it, it is difficult for him to get beyond a certain limit on the 
path of knowledge that leads through the multiple dimensions of real- 
ity. Apart from the forms of conduct and opening already mentioned 
in connection with the new realism (forms that remain valid and pos- 
sible), perhaps only special and traumatic situations can momentarily 
overcome this limit. And I have already spoken of those. 



Part 6 



The Realm of Art 



From "Physical" Music 
to the Drug Regime 



21 

The Sickness of 
European Culture 



In my discussion of personal values and the new realism, I have men- 
tioned the nature of culture and art in the modern world. I return to that 
subject but from a slightly different point of view, in order to define the 
potential significance of this realm for the differentiated human type* 

When speaking of the relationship between recent art and culture 
and the entire dissoiutive process, one can call upon the principal thesis 
expounded by Christoph Steding in The Empire and the Sickness of 
European Culture 1 — a good study of the genesis of the cultural char- 
acteristics that took form in Europe after the decline of its traditional 
unity. Steding emphasizes that present culture had its point of depar- 
ture in the dissociation, neutralization, emancipation, and absolutiza- 
tion of particular realms, which therefore ceased to be more or less 
organic parts of a whole. He refers especially to a formative center of 
all existence that gave a meaning to life, a center that also guaranteed 
a sufficiently organic character to the culture. The positive and neces- 
sary manifestation of this center on the political level corresponded to 
the principle of the Empire, not only in its secular significance (that is, 
political in a limited sense), but spiritual as well, which it preserved in 
the medieval European ecumene and which was marked by a political 
theology of high Ghibellinism, as supported by Dante himself. 

In Europe, this process of dissolution, which always follows the dis- 
appearance of any higher point of reference, had two connected causes. 
The first was a kind of paralysis of the idea of European tradition as a 
center of gravity — which also corresponded to an obscuration, mate- 
rializing, and decline of the Empire and its authority. Then, as if by 
counterpoint, there ensued the second cause: the centrifugal motion of 



150 






? :t 



I 



&'?? 



The Sickness of European Culture 151 

the parts, the dissociation and autonomization of partial areas, condi- 
tioned precisely by the weakening and disappearance of the originating 
force of gravity. From the political point of view, there was the well- 
known consequence that we need not dwell on: the end of the unified 
whole that the preceding European world still presented politically and 
socially, despite a system of ample regional autonomies and multiple 
tensions. Steding calls this a "Swissifying" and "Dutchifying" 2 of areas 
previously organically included in the complex of the Empire, and the 
fragmentation consequent on the rise of national states. But on the 
intellectual level the effect was necessarily the formation of a divided, 
"neutral" culture, devoid of any objective character. 

This is indeed the genesis and the predominant character of cul- 
ture, science, and art that have come to prevail in the modern era. It is 
not necessary to make a detailed examination of that realm here. If I 
continued the discussion of modern science and its technical applica- 
tions, it would be easy to highlight this process of increasing auton- 
omy, a process neither checked nor restrained by any higher limits or 
guidance: hence one often has the impression that technical-scientific 
development takes man in hand and faces him with difficult, unex- 
pected situations full of unknowns. I need not dwell on the specialized 
fragmentation, the lack of a higher and unifying principle of modern 
knowledge, as it is quite evident. These are the consequences of one 
of the dogmas of progressive thought, the unassailable "freedom of 
science" and of scientific research, which is a simple, euphemistic way 
to indicate and legitimize the development of one activity dissociated 
from the whole. 

That "freedom" is not unlike the "freedom of culture" celebrated as 
a victory, with which the active processes of dissolution likewise mani- 
fest in an inorganic civilization (as opposed to what Vico recognized as 
proper to all the "heroic periods" of preceding civilizations). One of the 
most typical expressions of the "neutralization" of such a culture is the 
antithesis between culture and politics: pure art and pure culture are 
supposed to have nothing to do with politics. In the direction of literary 
liberalism and humanism, separation has often turned into overt opposi- 
tion. There is a well-known intellectual and humanist type who fosters 
an almost hysterical intolerance for anything referring to the political 



152 The Realm of Art 

world — state ideals and authority, strict discipline, war, power, and 
domination — and denies them any spiritual or cultural value. Accordingly, 
there are those who have dealt with a "cultural history" carefully sepa- 
rated from "political history," making it a realm in itself. Naturally, the 
antipolitical pathos and alienation of this "neutral" art and culture have 
been largely justified by the degradation of the political sphere, by the 
low level to which political values have fallen in recent times. But it is 
more a case of an orientation on principle, which excludes any consider- | 

ation of how anomalous this situation is: in modern culture the "neu- 
tral" character has in fact become a constituent feature. 

Here, to anticipate any misunderstanding, it is prudent to empha- 
size that the opposite condition, the normal and creative one, is not 
that of a culture at the service of the state and of politics (politics in 
the degraded, modern sense). It is that in which a unique idea, the 
basic and central symbol of a given civilization, shows its strength and 
exerts a parallel, positive action, often invisible, both on the political 
plane (with all the values, not just the material ones, that should con- 
cern every true state) and on that of thought, culture, and the arts: it 
excludes any major schism or antagonism between the two realms, as 
well as any need for outside interventions. Precisely because an organic 
type of civilization no longer exists, precisely because the processes of 
dissolution have penetrated every realm of existence, all of that has 
ceased to exist. Today we seem fated to have the alternative, false and 
deleterious in itself, of either a "neutral" art and culture devoid of 
every higher warrant and meaning, or of an art and culture subject to 
pure and simple, degraded political forces, as is the case in totalitarian 
systems, and chiefly in those informed by the theories of "Marxist real- 
ism" and the corresponding polemic against the decadence and alien- 
ation of bourgeois art. 

The separation of art and culture is a direct consequence of subjec- 
tivism, the disappearance of any objective and impersonal style, and the 
general lack of the dimension of depth, following what has already been 
stated in broad terms about the "values of the personality" and over- 
coming them. What remains to be added is a summary examination of 
the most recent forms that "neutral" art has given rise to, in order to 
take stock of the situation. 



22 

Dissolution 
in Modern Art 



When speaking of modern art, the first thing to mention is its "inti- 
mate" quality, typical of a feminine spirituality that wants nothing to 
do with great historic and political forces; out of morbid sensitivity 
{sometimes brought about by a trauma), it retreats into the world of 
the artist's private subjectivity, valuing only the psychologically and 
aesthetically "interesting." The works of Joyce, Proust, and Gide mark 
the extreme of this tendency in literature. 

In some cases, the trend with "pure art" as its slogan is associated 
with the above specifically in the sense of a pure formalism of expressive 
perfection; the "subject" becomes irrelevant, so that any intrusion of it is 
deemed a contamination. (Benedetto Croce's aesthetics, if it were not so 
insipid, could be cited here.) In these cases an even greater degree of dis- 
sociation is present than in the fetishism of the artist's own interiority. 

There is no point in speaking of the current desire to hold on to 
a "traditional art." Today no one has any idea of what can rightly be 
called traditional in a higher sense. We find here only academicism 
and the withered reproduction of models, which lack — and must needs 
lack — any original creative force. It is a variety of the "regime of resi- 
dues"; the so-called great art relegated to the past is merely the stuff of 
rhetoric. 

In the opposite, avant-garde trend, value and meaning are reduced 
to those of a revolt and an illustration of the general process of dissolu- 
tion. Its works are often interesting, not from an artistic point of view 
but rather as indices of the climate of modern life. They reflect the criti- 
cal situation already alluded to in speaking of European nihilism, but 
give rise to nothing constructive, permanent, or durable. We should note 
amidst the chaos of styles the cases of rapid retreat from the most 

153 



i 

i 



\ r 



154 The Realm of Art 

advanced positions: almost all those avant-gardists who were most revo- 
lutionary in an existential situation that was originally authentic have 
accepted a new academicism, a new conventionality, and the commer- 
cialization of their work. Equally typical is the subsequent turn, on the 
part of some of these artists, in an abstract, formal, and neoclassical 
direction, which is an evasion that puts an end to the relentless tension 
of their former, more authentic, revolutionary phase. One could speak 
here of an "Apollonism," in the admittedly arbitrary sense in which 
Nietzsche used the term in The Birth of Tragedy. 

Nonetheless, from the differentiated man's point of view the process 
of dissolution found in the most extreme art (I will address music later), 
with its atmosphere of anarchic or abstract freedom, may actually have 
*"a liberating value, as opposed to much of yesterday's bourgeois art. 
Aside from this, after the exhaustion of expressionism as a shapeless 
eruption of dissociated, psychic contents, and after the exhaustion of 
dadaism and surrealism, if their attitudes had persisted we would have 
witnessed the self-dissolution of modern art, which would have left an 
empty spiritual space. In a different epoch, it is precisely in that space 
that a new "objective" art might have taken shape, in that "grand style" 
to which Nietzsche referred: "The greatness of an artist is not measured 
by the beautiful sentiments that he arouses — only girls can think along 
these lines — but by the degree to which he approaches the grand style. 
This has in common with great passion the disdain of pleasure; he for- 
gets to persuade, he wills ... To make himself master of the chaos that 
one is, to force his own chaos to become form, mathematics, law — that 
is the grand ambition. Around such despotic men a silence is born, a 
fear, similar to what is felt at a great sacrilege." 1 But to think this way 
in the present world is absurd: our epoch lacks any center, any meaning, 
any objective symbol that could give soul, content, and power to this 
"grand style." 

Similarly, in the field of fiction what is of interest today belongs 
to the documentary genre, which, with more or less expressive power, 
makes us aware of the state of contemporary existence. Only here, and 
in a few cases, is subjectivism overcome. But in the majority of liter- 
ary works, in short stories, dramas, and novels, the regime of residues 
persists, with its typical forms of subjective dissociation. Their constant 



I 



Dissolution in Modern Art 155 

background, rightly called the ''fetishism of human relationships," con- 
sists of the insignificant, sentimental, sexual, or social problems of 
insignificant individuals, reaching the extreme of dullness and banality 
in a certain epidemic type of American novel. 

Having mentioned "social problems," I must also squelch the claims, 
or more accurately, the aesthetic and artistic ambitions, of "Marxist 
realism," The Marxist critic condemns the "bourgeois novel" as a phe- 
nomenon of alienation, but as I have already said, the intent of giving a 
social content or interpretation to the narrative, specifically mirroring 
the dialectic evolution of classes, the impulse of the proletariat, and so 
on, is merely a simian parody of realism and the organic integration of a 
divided and neutral culture. Here one kind of dissociation is replaced by 
another more serious one: that of making the socioeconomic element an 
absolute, detached from the rest. "Social" problems are, in themselves, 
of as little interest and importance as those of personal relationships and 
fetishist sentimentalities. None of these touches the essence; they fall 
far short of what might be the object of fiction and of a high art in an 
organic civilization. The few fictional writings brought to a difficult and 
artificial birth under the sign of "Marxist realism" speak for themselves; 
they are coarse material forced into a straitjacket by the demands of pure 
propaganda and "communist edification/' One cannot speak here either 
of aesthetic criticism or of art, but rather of political agitation in the 
lowest meaning of the term. However, the present world is such that 
even where there was a demand for "functional art " for a "consumer 

J Mb 

art" (Gropius's expression) that was not "alienated," it was obliged more 
or less to end at the same level. The only sector that was preserved was 
perhaps architecture, because its functionalism does not require reference 
| to any higher meanings, which are nonexistent today. When a Marxist 

critic like Lukacs writes: "In recent times art has become a luxury item 
for idle parasites; artistic activity, in its turn, has become a separate pro- 
fession with the task of satisfying those luxury needs," 2 he sums up what 
art is practically reduced to in our day. 

This reductio ad absurdum of an activity sundered from every 
organic and necessary context parallels the other forms of internal dis- 
solution that are present today, and as such facilitates the radical revi- 
sion that the differentiated human type is forced to make concerning 



K 



J 



156 The Realm of Art 

the importance of art in the earlier period. I have already mentioned 
how, in the climate of the present civilization and its objective, elemen- 
tary, even barbaric tendencies, many people have discarded the notion 
of the period of bourgeois romanticism that art is one of the "supreme 
activities of the spirit," revealing the meaning of the world and of life. 
The man whom we have in mind can of course agree with this devalu- 
ation of art today. The fetishizing of art in the bourgeois period, con- 
nected with the cult of the "creative personality," the "genius," is alien 
to him. Even when it comes to some of the so-called great art of yester- 
day, he may feel no less distant than certain men of action today, who 
pay no attention to appearances, not even for "recreation," but are inter- 
ested in other things. We may well share and approve this attitude — 
based, however, on the higher realism of which I have spoken, and on 
the sentiment of the "merely human" that is the constant basis of that 
art, in all its pathos and tragedy. It may even be that a differentiated 
man finds himself more comfortable with certain very modern art, 
because in itself it represents art's self-dissolution. 

Incidentally, this devaluation of art, justified by the latest conse- 
quences of its "neutralization" and the new, active realism, had some 
general precedents in the traditional world* Art in a traditional and 
organic civilization never occupied the central spiritual position that 
the period of humanist and bourgeois culture accorded to it. Before the 
modern era, when art had a true, higher meaning, this was thanks to 
its preexisting contents, superior and prior to it, neither revealed nor 
"created" by it as art. These contents gave meaning to life and could 
exist, manifest, and act even in the virtual absence of what is called art, 
in works that sometimes might seem "barbaric" to the aesthete and the 
humanist who have no sense of the elementary and primordial. 

We can draw an analogy with the attitude toward art in general that 
the differentiated man, looking to a new freedom, can assume in this 
period of dissolution. He is very little interested in, or preoccupied with, 
the current "crisis of art." Just as he sees no valid, authentic knowledge in 
modern science, similarly he recognizes no spiritual value in the art that 
has taken shape in the modern era through the processes mentioned at 
the beginning of this chapter; he sees no substitute for the meanings that 
can be kindled by direct contact with reality in a cool, clear, and essential 



Dissolution in Modern Art 157 

climate. Upon objective consideration of the processes at work, one has 
the distinct feeling that art no longer has a future: that it is relegated to 
an evermore marginal position with respect to existence, its value being 
reduced to a luxury, in accord with Lukacs's criticism quoted above 

It is helpful to return for a moment to the particular realm of mod- 
ern fiction, where one deals with works that are corrosive and defeatist 
so as to anticipate the same possibility of misunderstanding as in the 
case of neorealism. Clearly, my position has nothing in common with 
judgments based on bourgeois points of view; thus the accusation of the 
divided and neutral character of art must not be confused with moral- 
izing, or with the censuring of art on the part of current petty morality. 
In the artistic works in question, it is not a matter of those "existential 
testimonies" pure and simple, to which one can apply this saying about 
Schoenberg: "All his happiness lay in recognizing unhappiness; all his 
beauty in forbidding himself the appearance of beauty/' 3 It concerns a 
particular art that directly or indirectly works to undermine any ideal- 
ism, to deride any principles, to attack institutions, to reduce to mere 
words ethical values, the just, the noble, and the dignified — and all this 
without even obeying an explicit agenda (hence its difference from a 
corresponding literature of the Left, or the use and political exploita- 
tion of that literature on the part of the Left). 

We know which groups raise an indignant protest against a similar, 
popular type of art. This is not the correct reaction, in my view, because 
it disregards its potential significance as a touchstone, especially for the 
differentiated man. Without anticipating coming chapters, I shall* just 
say here that the difference between depraved and mutilated realism, 
and positive realism, lies in the latter's affirmation that there are values 
that, for a given human type, are not mere fictions or fantasies, but 
realities — absolute realities. Among these are spiritual courage, honor 
(not in the sexual sense), straightforwardness, truth, and fidelity. An 
existence that ignores these is by no means "realistic," but sub-real. For 
the man who concerns us, dissolution cannot touch these values, except 
in extreme cases of an absolute "rupture of levels." One must neverthe- 
less distinguish between the substance and certain expressions of it, and 
also recognize that, on account of the general transformations of men- 
tality and environment that have already happened or are in process, 



158 The Realm of Art 

these expressions have already been prejudiced by the conformism, the 
rhetoric, the idealistic pathos, and the social mythology of the bour- 
geois period; thus their foundations are already undermined. Whatever 
is worth saving in the field of conduct needs to be liberated in an inte- 
rior and simplified form, needing no consensus, and sound enough not 
to lean on any of the institutions or value systems of yesterday's world. 
As for the rest, it may as well collapse. 

Once this point is settled (and it was already explained in the 
introduction), one can recognize that the corrosive action exercised by 
contemporary literature rarely touches on anything essential, and that 
many of its targets are not worth defending, cherishing, or regretting. 
Those scandalized, alarmist, and moralizing reactions stem from an 
undue confusion of the essential and the contingent, from the incapac- 
ity to conceive of any substantial values beyond limited forms of expres- 
sion that have become alien and ineffective. The differentiated man is 
not scandalized, but adopts a calm attitude of understatement; he can 
go even further in overthrowing the idols, but then he asks: "And now 
what?" At most, he will trace an existential line of demarcation, in 
the direction that I have repeatedly indicated. It does not matter that 
this corrosive and "immoral" literature does not obey any higher goals 
(though it likes to pretend that it does), and is only of value as evidence 
of the somber, tainted, and often filthy horizons of its authors. The 
evidence remains valid: it defines a certain distance. Times like these 
justify the saying that it is good to give the final push to that which 
deserves to fall. 

From our point of view, a reactionary "re-moralizing" of literature 
appears inauspicious, even if it were possible, in the sense of a return to 
the style of Manzoni, and in general of the nineteenth-century specialists 
in the theatrical presentation of concepts of honor, family, homeland, 
heroism, sin, and so on. One has to go beyond both positions: that of the 
moralizers, and that of the proponents of this corrosive art whose tran- 
sitional and primitive forms are destined to exhaust themselves, leaving 
for some a void, and for others, the free space for a higher realism. And 
these considerations should make it plain that my former accusations of 
divided and indifferent art are not to be interpreted as the desire to give 
art a moralizing, edifying, or didactic content. 



m 






23 

Modern Music 
and Jazz 



There is another particular area worth paying attention to, because it 
reflects some typical processes of the epoch, and examining it will lead 
us on to some general phenomena of contemporary life, I am speaking 
of music. 

It is obvious that, unlike what is proper to a "civilization of being," 
the music of a "civilization of becoming," which is unquestionably the 
modern one, must have developed in a peculiar way to enable us to 
speak of it as a Western demon of music. The processes of dissociation 
behind all modern art naturally play a part here, so that in the latest 
phases of music we find self-dissolving situations just like the general 
ones spoken of above. 

It is no oversimplification to say that the most modern Western 
music has been characterized by an ever more distinct separation from 
its origin, whether in melodramatic, melodious, pretentious, heroic 
romanticism (most recently in the line represented by Wagnerism), or 
in tragic pathos (we need only refer to Beethoven's usual ideas). This 
separation has been realized through two developments, only appar- 
ently opposed. 

The first is intellectualization, in which the cerebral element pre- 
vails, with an interest focused on harmony, often leading to a technical 
radicalism to the detriment of immediacy and sentiment ("human con- 
tents"), resulting in abstract rhythmic-harmonic constructs that often 
seem to be ends in themselves. The extreme case of this is recent twelve- 
tone music and strict serialism. 

The second is the physical character found in the most recent music. 
This term has already been used for a music, mostly symphonic and 



159 



160 The Realm of Art 

descriptive, that returns in a certain sense to nature, removing itself 
from the subjective world of pathos, and is inclined to draw its principal 
inspiration from the world of things, actions, and elementary impulses. 
Here the process is similar to the intolerance for intimist, academic stu- 
dio painting during the rise of early impressionism and plein air paint- 
ing. This second musical tendency had already begun with the Russian 
school and the French impressionists, having as its limit compositions 
such as Honegger's Pacific 231 and Mossolov's The Iron Foundry. 
When the second, physical current met with the first, superintellectu- 
alized one, this meeting came to define a most interesting situation in 
recent music. One need only think of early Stravinsky, where an intel- 
lectualism of pure, overeiaborated rhythmic constructions blossomed 
into the evocation of something pertaining less to psychology, or to the 
passionate, romantic, and expressionistic world, than to the substratum 
of natural forces. One can see The Rite of Spring as the conclusion of 
this stage. It represents the almost complete triumph over nineteenth- 
century bourgeois music; music becomes pure rhythm, an intensity of a 
sonorous and tonal dynamism in action. It is "pure music," but with an 
additional Dionysian element, hence the particular reference to dance. 
The predominance of dance music over vocal and emotional music has 
also characterized this current. 

Up to this point, such a process of liberating dissolution in the realm 
of music might have a positive aspect from our point of view. One could 
well approve of a revolution that has caused Italian operatic music of 
the early nineteenth century, and German as well, to appear out of 
phase, heavy, and false, and likewise even symphonic music with high 
"humanist" pretensions. The fact is, however, that, at least in the field 
of "serious" concert music, the next phase after the revolutionary stage 
mentioned above consisted of abstract forms dominated by technical 
virtuosity; forms whose inner meaning recalls what I have interpreted 
as an existential refusal or diversion, taking it beyond the plane of dan- 
gerous intensity. 

Here one can refer to Stravinsky's second period, where dance music 
gave way to a formal music that was sometimes parodistic, sometimes 
neoclassically inspired, or else characterized by a pure, dissociated 
sonorous arithmetic that had begun to appear in the preceding period, 



Viv 






& 



Modern Music and Jazz 161 

producing a timeless spatialization of sounds. One also thinks of 
Schoenberg, considering his development from free atonal music, often 
in the service of an exasperated, existential expressionism (the existen- 
tial revolt being expressed here as the atonal revolt against the "common 
chord/' a symbol of bourgeois idealism), to a phase of dodecaphony 
(twelve-tone system). This development in itself is very significant for the 
terminal crisis of modern music. After the chromatic limit had been 
reached, from a technical point of view, step-by-step from post-Wagne- 
rian music to that of Richard Strauss and Alexander Scriabin, atonal 
music abandoned the traditional tonal system, the basis of all preceding 
music, transporting, so to speak, the sound to a pure and free state, 
almost as if it were an active musical nihilism. After that, with all twelve 
tones of the chromatic scale taken without hierarchical distinction and 
in all their unlimited possibilities of direct combination, the twelve-tone 
system sought to impose a new abstract law, beyond the formulae of 
common-practice harmony. Recently, music has experimented with 
sounds created by electronic technology, which transcend traditional 
orchestral means of production. This new territory also incurs the prob- 
lem of finding an abstract law to apply to electronic music. 

One can see in the extremes of dodecaphony reached in Anton von 
Webern's compositions that the trend can go no further. While Adorno 
could state in his Philosophy of Modern Music: "The twelve-tone tech- 
nique is our destiny," 1 others have justly spoken of a musical "ice age." 
We have arrived at compositions whose extreme rarefaction and formal 
abstraction depict worlds similar to that of modern physics with its 
pure algebraic entities or, on the other hand, that of some surrealists. 
The very sounds are freed from traditional structures and propelled 
into a convoluted system where the complete dissolution into the form- 
less, with skeletal and atomically dissociated timbres, is contained only 
by the pure algebra of the composition. As in the world created by 
machine technology, the technical perfection and force of these new 
musical resources is accompanied by the same emptiness, soullessness, 
spectrality, or chaos. It is inconceivable that the new twelve -tone and 
post-serial language, with its foundation of inner devastation, could 
express contents similar to those of earlier music. At most, this language 
can be conducive to exasperated, existential expressionistic contents 



M 



162 The Realm of Art 

such as surface in Alban Berg's works. The limit is crossed by the so- 
called musique concrete of Pierre Schaeffer, with its "organization of 
noises" and "montage" of environmental and orchestral sounds. A 
typical case is that of John Cage, a musician who declares explicitly 
that his compositions are no longer music. Going beyond the disintegra- 
tions of traditional structures through serial music and leaving behind 
Webern and his school, Cage mixes music with pure noise, electronic 
sound effects, long pauses, random insertions, even spoken ones such as 
radio transmissions. The goal is to produce disorientation in the listener 
in the same way as dadaism, so that one is hurled toward unexpected 
horizons, beyond the realm of music, and even of art in general. 

If we look instead for the continuing role of dance music, we shall 
not find it in the "classical" symphonic genre but in modern dance 
music, specifically in jazz. It is with good reason that the present epoch, 
besides being called the "age of the emergence of the masses," the "age 
of the economy," and "the age of omnipotent technology," has been 
called the "Jazz Age." This shows that the extension of the trend in 
question now goes beyond esoteric musical circles and saturates our 
contemporaries' general manner of listening. Jazz reflects the same 
tendency as early Stravinsky, in terms of the pure rhythmic or synco- 
pated element; apart from its elements of song, it is a "physical" music 
that does not stop at the soul, but directly arouses and stirs the body. 
This is quite different from the earlier European dance music; in fact 
the very gracefulness, impetus, movement, and sensuality permeating 
those dances — for example, the Viennese or English waltz, and even 
the tango — are substituted in jazz by something mechanical, disjointed, 
altogether primitively ecstatic, and even paroxysmal through the use of 
constant repetition. This elemental content cannot be lost on anyone 
who finds himself in great European and American metropolitan dance 
halls, amidst the atmosphere of hundreds of couples shaking themselves 
to the syncopation and driving energy of this music. 

The enormous and spontaneous spread of jazz in the modern world 
shows that meanings no different from those of the physico-cerebral 
"classical" music, which superseded nineteenth-century bourgeois 
melodrama and pathos, have in fact thoroughly penetrated the younger 
generation. But there are two sides to this phenomenon. Those who 



?j 



Modern Music and Jazz 163 

once went crazy for the waltz or delighted in the treacherous and con- 
ventional pathos of melodrama, now find themselves at ease surrounded 
by the convulsive -mechanical or abstract rhythms of recent jazz, both 
"hot'* and "cool," which we must consider as more than a deviant, 
superficial vogue. We are facing a rapid and central transformation of 
the manner of listening, which is an integral part of that complex that 
defines the nature of the present. Jazz is undeniably an aspect of the 
resurfacing of the elemental in the modern world, bringing the bour- 
geois epoch to its dissolution. Naturally, the young men and women 
who like to dance to jazz today do so simply "for fun" and are not con- 
cerned with this; yet the change exists, its reality unprejudiced by its 
lack of recognition, since its true meaning and possibilities could only 
be noted from the particular point of view employed by us in all of our 
analyses. 

Some have included jazz among the forms of compensation that 
today's man resorts to when faced with his practical, arid, and mechan- 
ical existence; jazz is supposed to provide him with raw contents of 
rhythm and elemental vitality* If there is any truth in this idea, we must 
consider the fact that to arrive at this, Western man did not create origi- 
nal forms, nor utilize elements of European folk music, which, for exam- 
ple in the rhythms of southeastern Europe (Romanian or Hungarian), 
has a fascination and an intensity comprising not only rhythm but also 
authentic dynamics. He instead looked for inspiration in the patrimony 
of the lower and more exotic races, the Negroes and mulattoes of _the 
tropical and subtropical zones. 

According to one of the scholars of Afro- Cuban music, Fernando 
Ortiz, ail the primary elements of modern dance actually have these 
origins, including those whose origins are obscured by the fact that they 
have come through Latin America. One can deduce that modern man, 
especially North American man, has regressed to primitivism in choos- 
ing, assimilating, and developing a music of such primitive qualities as 
Negro music, which was even originally associated with dark forms of 
ecstasy. 

In fact, it is known that African music, the origin of the principal 
rhythms of modern dances, has been one of the major techniques used 
to open people up to ecstasy and possession. Both Alfons Dauer and 



164 The Realm of Art 

Ortiz have rightly seen the characteristic of this music as its polyrhyth- 
mic structure, developed in such a way that the static [on-beat] accents 
that mark the rhythm constantly act as ecstatic [off-beat] accents; hence 
the special rhythmic figures that generate a tension intended to "feed an 
uninterrupted ecstasy." 2 The same structure has been preserved in all 
so-called syncopated jazz. These syncopations are like delays that tend 
to liberate energy or generate an impulse: a technique used in African 
rites to induce possession of the dancers by certain entities, the Orisha 
of the Yoruba or the Loa of the Voodoo of Haiti, who took over their 
personalities and "rode" them. This ecstatic potential still exists in jazz. 
But even here there is a process of dissociation, of abstract development 
of rhythmic forms separated from the whole to which they originally 
belonged. Thus, given the desacralization of the environment and the 
nonexistence of any institutional framework or corresponding ritual 
tradition, any suitable atmosphere or appropriate attitude, one cannot 
expect the specific effects of authentic African music with its evocative 
function; the effect always remains a diffuse and formless possession, 
primitive and collective in character. 

This is very apparent in the latest forms, such as the music of the so- 
called beat groups. Here the obsessive reiteration of a rhythm prevails 
(similar to the use of the African tom-tom), causing paroxysmal con- 
tortions of the body and inarticulate screams in the performers, while 
the mass of the listeners joins in, hysterically shrieking and throwing 
themselves around, creating a collective climate similar to that of the 
possessions of savage ritual and certain Dervish sects, or the Macumba 
and the Negro religious revivals. 

The frequent use of drugs both by performers of this music and by 
the enraptured young people is also significant, causing a true, frenetic 
"crowd mentality," as in beat or hippie sessions in California involving 
tens of thousands of both sexes. 

Here we are no longer concerned with the specific compensation 
that one can find in syncopated dance music as the popular counterpart 
and extension of the extremes reached, but not maintained, by modern 
symphonic music; we are concerned with the semi-ecstatic and hysteri- 
cal beginnings of a formless, convoluted escapism, empty of content, a 
beginning and end in itself. Hence, it is completely inappropriate when 









Modern Music and Jazz 165 



some compare it to certain frenetic, collective, ancient rites, because the 
latter always had a sacred background. 

Quite apart from similar extreme and aberrant forms, one can still 
consider the general problem of all these methods that provide elemen- 
tal, ecstatic possibilities, which the differentiated man, not the masses, 
can use in order to feed that particular intoxication described earlier, 
which is the only nourishment he can existentially draw from an epoch 
of dissolution. The processes of recent times tend precisely toward these 
extremes; and whereas some of the present youth merely seek to dull 
their senses and to use certain experiences merely for extreme sensa- 
tions, others can use such situations as a challenge that demands the 
right response: a reaction that arises from "being." 



24 
Excursus on Drugs 



Going beyond music and dance, we are led to an even larger and 
more problematic realm, which embraces many other methods being 
increasingly used by the younger generation. The North American Beat 
Generation, in putting together alcohol, the sexual orgasm, and drugs 
as essential ingredients to give them a sense of life, radically associ- 
ated techniques that in reality have a common background that I have 
alluded to earlier. 

I need not dwell much on this realm. Apart from what will be said 
of sex in another chapter, I shall address here only a few considerations 
on drugs, which are the means that, among all those used in certain 
sectors of the contemporary world, most visibly have the goal of an 
ecstatic escape. 

The increasing spread of drugs among today's youth is a very sig- 
nificant phenomenon, A specialist, Dr + Laennec, writes: "In our lands, 
the most widespread category of drug addicts is represented by the neu- 
rotics and psychopaths for whom the drug is not a luxury but an essen- 
tial food, the response to anguish. . . . Toxicomania now appears as an 
additional symptom of the patient's neurotic syndrome, one symptom 
among others, a last defense, soon becoming the one and only defense." 1 
These considerations can be generalized, or rather extended, to an even 
larger circle of people who are not clinically neurotic: I am speaking 
above all about young people who have more or less distinctly per- 
ceived the emptiness and boredom of modern existence, and are seek- 
ing an escape from it. The impulse can be contagious: drug use extends 
to individuals who did not have this original impetus as a point of 
departure, and in such people it can only be regarded as an avoidable 
bad habit. Once starting on drugs to fit in or be in vogue, they succumb 



166 



Excursus on Drugs 167 

to the seduction of the states caused by the drug, which often wrecks 
their already weak personality. 

With drugs we have a situation similar to that of syncopated music. 
Both were often transpositions onto the profane and "physical" plane 
of means that were originally used to open one up to the suprasensible 
in initiation rites or similar experiences. Just as dances to modern syn- 
copated music derive from ecstatic Negro dance, the various drugs used 
today and created in laboratories correspond to drugs that were often 
used for "sacred" ends in primitive populations, according to ancient 
traditions. This is even true for tobacco; strong extracts of tobacco were 
used to prepare young Native Americans in their withdrawal from pro- 
fane life to obtain "signs" and visions. A similar claim can be made for 
alcohol, within certain limits; we are aware of the tradition centered on 
"sacred beverages," as in the use of alcohol in Dionysian and similar 
rituals. For example, alcoholic beverages were not prohibited in ancient 
Taoism: on the contrary, they were considered "life essences" induc- 
ing an intoxication that, like dance, could lead to a "magical state of 
grace," sought by the so-called real men. In addition, the extracts of 
coca, mescal, peyote, and other narcotics have been, and often still are, 
used in the rituals of secret societies of Central and South America. 

No one has a clear or adequate idea about all this anymore, because 
there is not enough emphasis today on the fact that the effects of these 
substances are quite different according to the constitution, the spe- 
cific capacity for reaction, and — in these cases of nonprofane use — the 
spiritual preparation and intent of the user. Lewin has even spoken of 
a "toxic equation" that is different in every individual, but this concept 
has not been given the necessary emphasis, nor has the available field of 
observations been broad enough, given that the blocked existential situ- 
ation of the great majority of our contemporaries considerably restricts 
the possible range of reaction to drugs. 

However, the "personal equation" and the specific zone on which 
drugs, here including alcohol, act, lead the individual toward alienation 
and a passive opening to states that give him the illusion of a higher free- 
dom, an intoxication and an unfamiliar intensity of sensation, but that 
in reality have a character of dissolution that by no means "takes him 
beyond." In order to expect a different result from these experiences, he 



168 The Realm of Art 

would have to have at his command an exceptional degree of spiritual 
activity, and his attitude would be the opposite of those who seek and 
need drugs to escape from tensions, traumatic events, neuroses, and feel- 
ings of emptiness and absurdity. 

I have already pointed out the African polyrhythmic technique: one 
energy is locked into continuous stasis in order to unleash an energy 
of a different order. In the inferior ecstaticism of primitive peoples this 
opens the way for possession by dark powers. I have said that in our 
case, this different energy should be produced by the response of the 
"being'* (the Self) to the stimulus* The situation created by the reac- 
tion to drugs and even alcohol is no different. But this kind of reac- 
tion almost never occurs; the reaction to the substance is too strong, 
rapid, unexpected, and external to be simply experienced, and thus the 
process cannot involve the "being." It is as if a powerful current pene- 
trated the consciousness without requiring assent, leaving the person to 
merely notice the change of state: he is submerged in this new state, and 
"acted on" by it. Thus the true effect, even if not noticed, is a collapse, a 
lesion of the Self, for all his sense of an exalted life or of a transcendent 
beatitude or sensuality. 

For the process to proceed differently, it would go schematically 
as follows: at the point in which the drug frees energy x in an exterior 
way, an act of the Self, of "being/ 5 brings its own double energy, x + x, 
into the current and maintains it up to the end. Similarly, a wave, even 
if unexpected, serves a skilled swimmer with whom it collides by pro- 
pelling him beyond it. Thus, there would be no collapse, the negative 
would be transformed into positive, no condition of passivity would be 
formed with respect to the drug, the experience in a certain way would 
be deconditioned, and, as a result, one would not undergo an ecstatic 
dissolution, devoid of any true opening beyond the individual and only 
substantiated by sensations. Instead, in certain cases there would be the 
possibility of coming into contact with a superior dimension of reality, 
which was the intention of ancient, nonprofane drug use. To a certain 
degree, the harmful effect of drugs would be eliminated. 

At this point it will be helpful to add some details. In general, drugs 
can be divided into four categories: stimulants, depressants, halluci- 
nogens, and narcotics. The first two categories do not concern us; for 



< 



i 



Excursus on Drugs 169 

example, the use of tobacco and alcohol is irrelevant unless it becomes 
a vice, that is, if it leads to addiction. 

The third category includes drugs that bring on states in which one 
experiences various visions and seemingly other worlds of the senses 
and spirit. On account of these effects, they have also been called "psy- 
chedelics," under the assumption that the visions project and reveal 
the hidden contents of the depths of one's own psyche, but are not rec- 
ognized as such. As a result, physicians have even tried to use drugs 
like mescaline for a psychic exploration analogous to psychoanalysis. 
However, when all is reduced to the projection of a psychic substratum, 
not even experiences of this kind can interest the differentiated man. 
Leaving aside the perilous contents of the sensations and their artifi- 
cial paradise, these illusory phantasmagoria do not take one beyond, 
even if one cannot exclude the possibility that what is acting may not 
be merely the contents of one's own subconscious, but dark influences 
that, finding the door open, manifest themselves in these visions. We 
might even say that those influences, and not the simple substratum 
repressed by the individual psyche, are responsible for certain impulses 
that can burst out in these states, even driving some compulsively to 
commit criminal acts. 

An effective use of these drugs would presuppose a preliminary 
"catharsis," that is, the proper neutralization of the individual uncon- 
scious substratum that is activated; then the images and senses could 
refer to a spiritual reality of a higher order, rather than being reduced 
to a subjective, visionary orgy. One should emphasize that the instances 
of this higher use of drugs were preceded not only by periods of prepa- 
ration and purification of the subject, but also that the process was 
properly guided through the contemplation of certain symbols. 
Sometimes "consecrations" were also prescribed for protective pur- 
poses. There are accounts of certain indigenous communities in Central 
and South America whose members, only while under the influence of 
peyote, hear the sculpted figures on ancient temple ruins "speak," 
revealing their meaning in terms of spiritual enlightenment. The impor- 
tance of the individual's attitude clearly appears from the completely 
different effects of mescaline on two contemporary writers who have 
experimented with drugs, Aldous Huxley and R. H. Zaehner. And it is 



170 The Realm of Art 

a fact that in the case of hallucinogens like opium and, in part, hashish, 
this active assumption of the experience that is essential from our point 
of view is generally excluded. 

There remains the category of narcotics and of substances that are 
also used for total anesthesia, whose normal effect is the complete sus- 
pension of consciousness. This corresponds to a detachment that would 
exclude all intermediate "psychedelic" forms and the insidious, ecstatic, 
and sensual contents, leaving a void. However, if consciousness were 
maintained, with the pure I at the center, it could facilitate the open- 
ing to a higher reality. But the advantages would be outweighed by the 
extreme difficulty of any training capable of maintaining detached con- 
sciousness. 

In general, one must keep in mind that drug use even for a spiritual 
end, that is, to catch glimpses of transcendence, has its price. How drugs 
produce certain psychic effects has not yet been determined by modern 
science. It is said that some, like LSD, destroy certain brain cells. One 
point is certain: Habitual use of drugs brings a certain psychic disorga- 
nization; one should substitute for them the power of attaining analo- 
gous states through one's own means. Therefore, when one has chosen 
a path based on the maximum unification of all one's psychic faculties, 
these drawbacks must be kept firmly in mind. 

The common reader probably finds these ideas tedious, and lacking 
in personal points of reference to give him bearings. But, again, it is the 
development of our argument that has required even this brief excursus. 
In fact, only by dwelling on these possibilities, as unusual as they are, 
can one adequately identify the necessary antitheses. This shows us the 
blockage that prevents any positive value in the evocation of the elemen- 
tal in today's world, leaving only those purely dissolutive and regressive 
processes that prevail increasingly in the younger generations. 



Part 7 



Dissolution in the 
Social Realm 



25 
States and Parties 



Apoliteia 



As a result of today's general processes of dissolution, the sociopolitical 
is the realm that most displays the lack of any truly legitimate structure 
possessing a link to higher meanings. Given this state of affairs, we 
must frankly recognize that the human type who concerns us must gov- 
ern his own behavior by entirely different principles from those which, 
in social life, would be proper to him under other circumstances. 

In the present epoch, no nation-states exist that, by their nature, 
can claim any principle of true, inalienable authority. Furthermore, one 
cannot even speak of states today in the proper traditional sense. Only 
"representative" and administrative systems exist, in which the primary 
element is no longer the state, understood as an entity in itself and 
an incarnation of a higher idea and power, but "society," conceived in 
terms of "democracy." This background even persists in totalitarian 
communist regimes, which so insist on the quality of "popular democ- 
racies." For a long time there have been no true sovereigns, monarchs 
by divine right capable of wielding sword and scepter, and symbols of 
a higher human ideal. More than a century ago, Juan Donoso Cortes 
stated that no kings existed capable of proclaiming themselves as such 
except "by the will of the nation," adding that, even if any had existed, 
they would not have been recognized. The few monarchies still surviv- 
ing are notoriously impotent and empty, while the traditional nobility 
has lost its essential character as a political class and any existential 
prestige and rank along with it. Its current representatives may still 
interest our contemporaries when put on the same plane as film actors 
and actresses, sport heroes and opera stars, and when through some 
private, sentimental, or scandalous chance, they serve as fodder for 
magazine articles. 

172 



\ 1- L 



States and Parties 173 

Even outside traditional frameworks , true leaders do not exist today. 
"I turned my back on the rulers when I saw what they called ruling: 
bartering and haggling with the rabble. . . . Among all the hypocrisies, 
this seems to me the worst: that even those who commanded feigned 
the virtues of the serfs" 1 — Nietzsche's words are without exception still 
true of the so-called ruling class of our times. 

Like the true state, the hierarchical, organic state has ceased to 
exist. No comparable party or movement exists, offering itself as a 
defender of higher ideas, to which one can unconditionally adhere and 
support with absolute fidelity. The present world of party politics con- 
sists only of the regime of petty politicians, who, whatever their party 
affiliations, are often figureheads at the service of financial, industrial, 
or corporate interests. The situation has gone so far that even if par- 
ties or movements of a different type existed, they would have almost 
no following among the rootless masses who respond only to those 
who promise material advantages and "social conquests." When strik- 
ing these chords does not suffice, the only influence over the masses 
today — and now even more than ever — is on the plane of impassioned 
and subintellectual forces, which by their very nature lack any stabil- 
ity. These are the forces that demagogues, popular leaders, manipula- 
tors of myths, and fabricators of "public opinion" count on. In this 
regard we can learn from yesterday's regimes in Germany and Italy that 
positioned themselves against democracy and Marxism: that potential 
enthusiasm and faith that animated masses of people, even to the point 
of fanaticism, has completely vanished in the face of crisis, or else been 
transferred to new, opposing myths, replacing the preceding ones by 
the sole force of circumstances. One must expect this from every collec- 
tive current that lacks a dimension of depth, inasmuch as it depends on 
the forces I have mentioned, corresponding to the pure demos and its 
sovereignty — which is as much as to say, literally, "democracy." 

The only realms left for any efficacious political action after the end 
of the old regimes are this irrational and subintellectual plane, or the 
other one, determined by pure material and "social" utility. As a result, 
even if leaders worthy of the name were to appear today — men who 
appealed to forces and interests of a different type, who did not promise 
material advantages, who demanded and imposed a severe discipline on 



F 
.t' 



174 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

everyone, and who did not prostitute and degrade themselves just to 
ensure a personal, ephemeral, revocable, and formless power — they 
would have almost no hold on present society. The "immortal princi- 
ples" of 1789 and the rights of equality granted by absolute democracy 
to the atomized individual regardless of qualification or rank, and the 
irruption of the masses into the political structure, have effectively 
brought about what Walther Rathenau calls a "vertical invasion by bar- 
barians from below." 2 Consequently, the following observation of essay- 
ist Ortega y Gasset remains true: "The characteristic fact of the moment 
is that the mediocre soul, recognizing itself as mediocre, has the audacity 
to assert the right of mediocrity and impose it everywhere." 3 

In the introduction I mentioned the few who by temperament and 
vocation still think today, in spite of everything, about the possibility of 
a rectifying, political action. Men among the Ruins was written with 
their ideological orientation in mind* But on the basis of experience we 
must admit the lack of the necessary premises to reach any concrete, 
appreciable results in a struggle of this kind. On the other hand, I have 
specified within these pages a human type of a different orientation, 
although spiritually related to those others who will fight on even in 
hopeless positions. After taking stock of the situation, this type can only 
feel disinterested and detached from everything that is "politics" today. 
His principle will become apoliteia^ as it was called in ancient times. 

It is important to emphasize that this principle refers essentially 
to the inner attitude. In the present political situation, in a climate of 
democracy and "socialism," the rules of the game are such that the man 
in question absolutely cannot take part in it. He recognizes, as I have 
said before, that ideas, motives, and goals worthy of the pledge of one's 
own true being do not exist today; there are no demands of which he 
can recognize any moral right and foundation outside that which they 
derive as mere facts on the empirical and profane plane. However, apo- 
liteia^ detachment, does not necessarily involve specific consequences 
in the field of pure and simple activity. I have already discussed the 
capacity to apply oneself to a given task for love of action in itself and 
in terms of an impersonal perfection. So, in principle, there is no reason 
to exclude the political realm itself as a particular case among others, 
since participating in it on these terms requires neither any objective 



States and Parties 175 

value of a higher order, nor impulses that come from emotional and 
irrational layers of one's own being. But if this is how one dedicates 
oneself to political activity, clearly all that matters is the action and the 
impersonal perfection in acting for its own sake. Such political activ- 
ity, for one who desires it, cannot present a higher value and dignity 
than dedicating oneself, in the same spirit, to quite different activities: 
absurd colonization projects, speculations on the stock market, science, 
and even — to give a drastic example — arms traffic or white slavery. 

As conceived here, apoliteia creates no special presuppositions in 
the exterior field, not necessarily having a corollary in practical absten- 
tion. The truly detached man is not a professional and polemic outsider, 
nor conscientious objector, nor anarchist. Once it is established that life 
with its interactions does not constrain his being, he could even show the 
qualities of a soldier who, in order to act and accomplish a task, does not 
request in advance a transcendent justification and a quasi-theological 
assurance of the goodness of the cause. We can speak, in these cases, of 
a voluntary obligation that concerns the "persona," not the being, by 
which — even while one is involved — one remains isolated. 

I have already said that the positive overcoming of nihilism lies pre- 
cisely in the fact that lack of meaning does not paralyze the action of 
the "persona." In existential terms, the only exception would be the 
possibility of action being manipulated by some current political or 
social myth that regarded today's political life as serious, significant, 
and important. Apoliteia is the inner distance unassailable by this 
society and its "values"; it does not accept being bound by anything 
spiritual or moral. Once this is firm, the activities that in others would 
presuppose such bonds can be exercised in a different spirit. Moreover, 
there remains the sphere of activities that can be made to serve a higher- 
ordained and invisible end, as when I mentioned the two aspects of 
impersonality and what is to be gained from some forms of modern 
existence. 

Turning to a particular point, one can only maintain an attitude of 
detachment when facing the confrontation of the two factions con- 
tending for world domination today: the democratic, capitalist West 
and the communist East. In fact, this struggle is devoid of any meaning 
from a spiritual point of view. The "West" is not an exponent of any 



5> 



176 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

higher ideal. Its very civilization, based on an essential negation of tra- 
ditional values, presents the same destructions and nihilistic back- 
ground that is evident in the Marxist and communist sphere, however 
different in form and degree* I will not dwell on this, given that I have 
outlined a total conception of the course of history, and dismissed any 
illusion about the final result of that struggle for world control, in 
Revolt Against the Modern World. Since the problem of values does not 
come into question, at most it presents a practical problem to the dif- 
ferentiated man. That certain margin of material freedom that the 
world of democracy still leaves for external activity to one who will not 
let himself be conditioned inwardly, would certainly be abolished in a 
communist regime. Simply in view of that, one may take a position 
against the soviet-communist system: not because one believes in some 
higher ideal that the rival system possesses, but for motives one might 
almost call basely physical. 

On the other hand, one can keep in mind that for the differentiated 
man, having no interest in affirming and exposing himself in external 
life today, and his deeper life remaining invisible and out of reach, a 
communist system would not have the same fatal significance as for 
others; also an "underground front" could very well exist there. Taking 
sides in the present struggle for world hegemony is not a spiritual prob- 
lem, but a banal, practical choice. 

In any case, the general situation characterized by Nietzsche remains: 
"The struggle for supremacy amidst conditions that are worth nothing: 
this civilization of great cities, newspapers, fever, uselessness." 4 Such is 
the framework that justifies the inner imperative of apoliteia: to defend 
the world of being and dignity of him who feels himself belonging to a 
different humanity and recognizes the desert around himself. 



26 
Society 

The Crisis of 
Patriotic Feeling 



We now come to the social realm in the proper sense. Here we can 
only conclude that every organic unity has been dissolved or is dissolv- 
ing; caste, stock, nation, homeland, and even the family. Even when 
all these have not completely disappeared, their social foundation is 
not a living force full of significance, but the mere force of inertia. We 
have already seen this when speaking of the person: what exists today 
is essentially the shifting mass of "individuals," devoid of organic con- 
nections, a mass contained by external structures or moved by collec- 
tive, formless, and unstable currents. The differences between them, 
as they exist today, are no longer true differences. The classes are only 
fluid, economic classes. Again, the words of Zarathustra are timely: 
"Rabble above, rabble below! What do 'poor' or 'rich' mean today? I 
have forgotten how to tell the difference." 1 The only real hierarchies 
are those technical ones of the specialists who serve material utility, the 
needs (largely unnatural), and the distractions of the human animal: 
hierarchies in which rank and spiritual superiority no longer have any 
meaning or place. 

Instead of the traditional unification through particular bodies, 
orders, functional castes or classes, guilds — frameworks to which the 
individual felt an attachment, based on a supra-individual principle that 
informed his entire life, giving it a specific meaning and orientation — 
today's associations are determined only by the material interests of 
individuals, united only on this basis, such as trade unions, professional 
organizations, parties. The formless state of the people, turned into mere 



177 



176 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

higher ideal Its very civilization, based on an essential negation of tra- 
ditional values, presents the same destructions and nihilistic back- 
ground that is evident in the Marxist and communist sphere, however 
different in form and degree* I will not dwell on this, given that I have 
outlined a total conception of the course of history, and dismissed any 
illusion about the final result of that struggle for world control, in 
Revolt Against the Modern World. Since the problem of values does not 
come into question, at most it presents a practical problem to the dif- 
ferentiated mam That certain margin of material freedom that the 
world of democracy still leaves for external activity to one who will not 
let himself be conditioned inwardly, would certainly be abolished in a 
communist regime* Simply in view of that, one may take a position 
against the soviet-communist system: not because one believes in some 
higher ideal that the rival system possesses, but for motives one might 
almost call basely physical 

On the other hand, one can keep in mind that for the differentiated 
man, having no interest in affirming and exposing himself in external 
life today, and his deeper life remaining invisible and out of reach, a 
communist system would not have the same fatal significance as for 
others; also an "underground front" could very well exist there. Taking 
sides in the present struggle for world hegemony is not a spiritual prob- 
lem, but a banal, practical choice. 

In any case, the general situation characterized by Nietzsche remains: 
"The struggle for supremacy amidst conditions that are worth nothing: 
this civilization of great cities, newspapers, fever, uselessness." 4 Such is 
the framework that justifies the inner imperative of apoliteia: to defend 
the world of being and dignity of him who feels himself belonging to a 
different humanity and recognizes the desert around himself. 



M -\ 



178 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

masses, ensures that any possible order will necessarily have a centralistic 
and coercive character. The inevitable, centralizing, overgrown struc- 
tures of modern states, which increase their interventions and restrictions 
even when "democratic freedoms" are proclaimed, if on the one hand 
they hold off complete disorder, on the other they destroy whatever might 
still remain of organic bonds and unity. And this social standardization 
reaches its limit when openly totalitarian forms take over. 

Furthermore, the absurdity of modern life is blatantly revealed by 
those economic aspects that essentially, and regressively, determine 
it. On the one hand, an economy of necessities has decidedly become 
an economy of excess, one of whose causes is the overproduction and 
pTogress of industrial technology. On the other hand, overproduction 
requires, for the sake of the market, that a maximum volume of needs 
be fed and maintained among the masses: needs that, on the brink of 
becoming customary and "normal,''' entail a corresponding, growing 
conditioning of the individual. The first factor here is the very nature 
of the dissociated productive process that has, as it were, taken mod- 
ern man by the hand, like an unleashed giant incapable of restraint, 
thus confirming the saying: Fiat production pereat homo! (Let there 
be production! Let man perish! — Werner Sombart). While in a capi- 
talist regime not only greed for profits and dividends has a part in 
this senseless increase in production, but also the objective necessity 
for capital reinvestment in order to prevent a blockage paralyzing the 
entire system, another more general cause of the senseless increase of 
production along the lines of an excessive consumer economy is the 
necessity to employ labor to combat unemployment. As a result, in 
many states the principle of overproduction and overindustrializa- 
tion, exacerbated by the demands of private capitalism, has become 
the very dictator of sociopolitical planning. So a vicious circle forms, 
the opposite of a system in equilibrium, of processes well contained 
within sensible boundaries. 

This naturally brings us to an even more prominent aspect of the 
absurdity of modern existence: the unrestrained increase and growth of 
the population, occurring along with the regime of the masses, fostered 
by democracy, the "conquests of science," and the unselective welfare 
system. The procreative pandemic or demon is effectively the principal 






Society 179 

force that incessantly feeds and sustains the entire system of the modern 
economy, with its mechanism ever more conditioning the individual. 
Proof positive of the derisory character of the craze for power nurtured 
by today's man is the fact that this creator of machines, this dominator 
of nature, this inaugurator of the atomic era, is not far above an animal 
or a savage when it comes to sex. He is incapable of controlling the 
most primitive forms of the sexual impulse and everything connected 
with it* So, as though obeying a blind destiny, he ceaselessly, irrespon- 
sibly, increases the formless human mass and supplies the chief driving 
force to the entire system of the paroxysmal, unnatural, and ever more 
conditioned economic life of modern society, creating at the same time 
innumerable hotbeds of social and international instabilities and ten- 
sions. The vicious circle then becomes that of the mass, which, with the 
excess potential of a workforce, feeds overproduction, which in its turn 
seeks ever-larger markets and masses to absorb the products. Nor can 
we ignore the fact that demographic growth has an index inversely pro- 
portional to the social scale, thus adding a further factor to the general 
regressive process. 

Evidence of this is absurdly obvious, and could easily be developed 
and supported by specific analyses. But this summary of the essential 
points is enough to validate the principle of inner detachment not only 
toward the present political world but also, more generally, the social 
world. The differentiated man cannot feel part of a "society" like the 
present one, which is formless and has sunk to the level of purely mate- 
rial, economic, "physical" values, and moreover lives at this level and 
follows its insane course under the sign of the absurd. Therefore, apo- 
liteia requires the most decided resistance to any social myth. Here it is 
not just a matter of its extreme, openly collectivist forms, in which the 
person is not recognized as significant except as a fragment of a class 
or party or, as in the Marxist-Soviet area, is denied any existence of his 
own outside the society, so that personal destiny and happiness distinct 
from those of the collective do not even exist. We must equally reject 
the more general and bland ideal of "sociability" that today often func- 
tions as a slogan even in the so-called free world, after the decline of the 
ideal of the true state. The differentiated man feels absolutely outside of 
society, he recognizes no moral claim that requires his inclusion in an 



180 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

absurd system; he can understand not only those who are outside^ but 
even those who are against "society" — meaning against this society. 
Putting aside everything that does not directly concern him (because his 
way does not match that of his contemporaries), he would be the last 
to endorse efforts to normalize and rehabilitate within "society" those 
who have had enough of the game and are stigmatized as "unsuitable" 
and "asocial" — the anathema of democratic societies. The ultimate 
intention of such efforts is to narcotize those who can see through the 
absurd and nihilistic character of today's collective life, behind all the 
"social" masks and the corresponding lay mythology, as I have already 
said. 

Based on these general considerations, we can now examine the 
crisis that some particular ideals and institutions of the previous 
period are undergoing, in order to clarify the position to be taken in 
that regard. 

We turn first to the ideas of homeland and nation. The crisis that 
such ideas are suffering is evident, especially after World War II. On the 
one hand, it is a consequence of objective processes: the great economic 
and political forces in motion are such as to increasingly relativize the 
frontiers and to reduce the principle of national sovereignty. One tends 
to think in terms of large spaces and blocs or supranational systems, 
and given the growing uniformity of mores and ways of life, given the 
transformation of the population into masses, and given the develop- 
ment and ease of communications, everything that has a solely national 
reference is assuming the quasi-provincial character of a local curiosity. 

On the other hand, the crisis regards the way of feeling itself; it is 
connected to the decline of yesterday's myths and ideals, to which men 
respond less and less after the upheavals and downfalls of recent times, 
and which are ever less capable of awakening the old enthusiasm in the 
collectivity. 

As in so many previous occasions, it is also necessary here to see 
clearly what exactly is suffering the crisis, and to define its value. Again, 
it is not about the reality of the traditional world, but of conceptions 
essentially born and introduced with its destruction, and above all with 
the revolution of the Third Estate. The words "homeland" and 
"nation," in the modern sense of political myths and collective ideals, 



Society 181 

were virtually unknown in the traditional world. The traditional world 
knew "nationalities," ethnicities, and races only as natural facts, 
devoid of that specific political value that they would receive in mod- 
ern nationalism. They represented a primary material differentiated by 
hierarchies and subject to a superior principle of political sovereignty. 
In many cases, this elevated principle represented the primary element, 
the nation the secondary and derived element, since at the beginning 
there was no unity of language, territory, "natural borders," or relative 
ethnic homogeneity beyond the encounter and miscegenation of differ- 
ent bloods; these were often only the effect of a long formative process 
determined over centuries by a political center and its loyalist and feu- 
dal bonds. 

In addition, it is well known that in the West, political nations 
and nation-states emerged from the decline of the medieval ecumeni- 
cal unity, due to a process of dissociation, a freeing of particular units 
from a whole (as indicated in chapter 25). The process replicates on 
the international and continental plane the same features as would give 
rise within every state to the freeing of individuals, to social atomism 
and the dissolution of the organic concept of the state. 

To an extent, the formation of nations has run parallel with the 
revolutionary idea. Already in the oldest historical example, that of the 
France of Philip the Fair, one can see how the move toward a national 
state went hand in hand with a process of anti-aristocratic leveling, an 
incipient destruction of the articulations of an organic society due to 
absolutism, and the constitution of those centralized "public powers" 
that would become ever more prominent in modern states. We are well 
aware of the close relationship between the dissolution corresponding 
to the declaration of the "rights of man and the citizen" of 1789 and the 
patriotic, nationalistic, and revolutionary idea. The very word "patriot" 
was unknown before the French Revolution; it first appeared between 
1789 and 1793 to indicate one who supported the revolution against the 
monarchies and aristocracies. Similarly, in the European revolutionary 
movements of 1848 and 1849, "people," "national idea," and "patrio- 
tism" on the one hand, and revolution, liberalism, constitutionalism, 
republican and antimonarchical tendencies on the other, were concor- 
dant and often inseparable elements. 



/ 



182 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

It was in this climate, on the eve of the bourgeois or Third Estate 
revolution, that "homeland" and "nation" took on a primarily politi- 
cal meaning and that mythical value that would become ever more 
evident in the openly nationalistic ideologies that followed. Thus 
"patriotic" and "national sentiments" are tied to the mythology of 
the bourgeois era, and it was only then, during the relatively brief 
period from the French Revolution to the First or perhaps the Second 
World War, that the idea of nation actually played a determining role 
in European history, in close connection with the democratic ideolo- 
gies. The same idea is now playing the same role for the non-European 
peoples as they become emancipated, following the same presupposi- 
tions, or rather following the internal antitraditional and modernizing 
dissolutions. 

When bland patriotism turned into radical nationalistic forms, the 
regressive character of such tendencies and the contribution from the 
emergence of the mass-man in the modern world became clearly evi- 
dent. For the essence of nationalistic ideology is to hold homeland and 
nation as supreme values, conceiving them as mystical entities almost 
with a life of their own and having an absolute claim on the individual; 
whereas, in reality, they are only dissociated and formless realities, by 
way of their negation of any true hierarchical principle, and of any sym- 
bol or warrant of a transcendent authority. In general, the foundation 
of political unities that have taken form in this direction is antithetical 
to the traditional state. In fact, as I have said, the cement of the latter 
was a loyalty and fidelity that could dispense with the naturalistic fact 
of nationality; it was a principle of order and sovereignty that, by not 
being based on this fact, could even be valid in areas including more 
than one nationality. It was the dignities, particular rights, and castes 
that united or divided individuals "vertically," beyond the "horizontal" 
common denominator of "nation" and "homeland." In a word, it was 
unification from above, not from below. 

Once all this is recognized, we can see in a different light the pres- 
ent crisis, both objective and ideal, of the concepts and sentiments of 
homeland and nation. Again, one might speak of destructions that 
attack something already having a negative and regressive character, so 
that they could even signify a potential liberation, if the direction of the 






Society 183 

whole process were not toward something still more problematic. 
Therefore, even if only a void remained, it would be no reason for the 
differentiated man to deplore that crisis and concern himself with the 
reactions in the "realm of residues." The void could be filled, the nega- 
tive could give rise to the positive, only if the ancient principles returned 
to replace the dissolving naturalistic unities with those of a different 
type; if it were no longer homelands and nations that united or divided, 
but rather ideas; if the decisive thing were not sentimental and irratio- 
nal adhesion to a collectivizing myth, but a system of loyal, free, and 
strongly personalized connections — something that would naturally 
require as a fundamental point of reference leaders invested with a 
supreme and intangible authority. Along this line they could even be 
formed by transnational groupings such as were known in various 
imperial epochs and, partially, in the Holy Alliance. Today, the degraded 
counterfeit of all that is taking form alongside the crisis of national 
sovereignties: power blocs determined solely by factors that are mate- 
rial, economic, and "political" in the worst sense, devoid of every ideal. 
Hence the insignificance of the antithesis between the two principal 
blocs of this type existing today, between the democratic West and the 
communist and Marxist East. For lack of a third force of a different 
character, and a true ideal to unite and divide beyond homelands, 
nations, and anti-nations, the only prospect is that of an invisible unity, 
in a world without frontiers, of those few individuals who are associ- 
ated by their very nature, which is different from that of the man of 
today, and by the same inner law — in short, almost in the same teems 
as Plato used, speaking of the true state, which idea was then taken up 
by the Stoics. A similar, dematerialized type of unity and state was at 
the basis of the Orders, and its last reflection, deformed to the point of 
being unrecognizable, can be seen in secret societies like Freemasonry. 
If new processes are to develop when the present cycle exhausts itself, 
perhaps they could have their point of departure in this very kind of 
unity. Then we could see in action the positive side of overcoming the 
idea of homeland, whether as myth of the romantic bourgeois period or 
as a naturalistic fact almost irrelevant to a unity of a different type. 
Being from the same country or homeland would be replaced by being, 
or not being, for the same cause. Apoliteia^ the detachment of today, 



184 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

contains this eventual possibility for tomorrow. In this case too it is 
necessary to see the distance existing between the attitude indicated 
here and certain recent products of modern political erosion: a formless 
and humanitarian cosmopolitanism, a paranoid pacifism, and the 
whims of those who want to feel themselves only as "citizens of the 
world," eventually becoming the "conscientious objectors." 



i 



[ 



27 

Marriage 
and the Family 



Social factors present a closer connection with those of private life and 
mores, when one considers the problem of relations between the sexes, 
marriage, and the family as they are today. 

In our time, the crisis of the family as an institution is no less salient 
than that of the nineteenth-century romantic idea of homeland, and is 
largely an effect of processes that are irreversible, being tied to all the 
factors that characterize existence in recent times. Naturally, today's 
crisis of the family also arouses preoccupations and moral reactions, 
with more or less hopeless attempts at restoration that can offer nothing 
but conformism and an empty and false traditionalism. 

Here, too, I see things in a different way and, as in the case of the 
other phenomena already considered, must coldly recognize the reality 
of the situation. We have to face the consequences of the fact that the 
family has long since ceased to have any higher meaning, or been 
cemented by living factors that go beyond the merely individual. The 
organic and, to a certain degree, "heroic" character that its unity pre- 
sented in the past has been lost in the modern world, just as the insti- 
tution's residual veneer of "sacrality" bestowed by religious marriage 
has disappeared, or nearly so. In reality, in the great majority of cases 
the modern family is presented as a petit bourgeois institution deter- 
mined almost exclusively by conformist, utilitarian, primitive, or at best 
sentimental factors. Above all, its essential fulcrum has disappeared, 
which was constituted by the primarily spiritual authority of its head, 
the father: that is shown by the etymological meaning of the word pater 
as "lord," or "sovereign." At this rate one of the principal goals of the 
family, procreation, is reduced to the mere mindless propagation of 



185 



186 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

one's bloodline: propagation, moreover, that is promiscuous, given that 
with modern individualism any limitation of conjugal unions by stock, 
caste, and race has collapsed, and given that, in any case, it no longer 
has as counterpart the most essential continuity, that is, the transmis- 
sion of a spiritual influence, a tradition, and an ideal heritage from 
generation to generation. Yet how could it be otherwise? How could the 
family continue to have a firm, binding center, if its natural head, the 
father, is so often estranged from it today — even physically, when the 
practical mechanism of material life takes him away from it, in a soci- 
ety that is intrinsically absurd? What authority can the father have, 
especially in the so-called upper classes, if he is reduced to a money- 
making machine, a busy professional, and the like? Moreover, this often 
holds for both parents, owing to the emancipation of the woman and 
her entrance into the world of the professions and work. Even less con- 
ducive to the climate within the family or to a positive influence on the 
children is the alternative, the "lady" who devotes herself to a frivolous 
and mondaine existence. In such a situation, how can the erosive and 
disintegrating processes not work against the unity of the modern fam- 
ily, and how can the claim of a "sacred character" of the institution not 
be counted among the mendacious hypocrisies of our society? 

The interrelation between the disappearance of the preexisting prin- 
ciple of authority and the unleashing of individualism, already revealed 
in the political realm, is also manifested in the realm of the family. The 
decline of any prestige of the father has resulted in the estrangement of 
the children, the ever more clear and severe gap between new and old 
generations. The dissolution of the organic links in space (castes, bod- 
ies, and so on) corresponds to a dissolution in time, in the breaking of 
the spiritual continuity between the generations, between fathers and 
sons. The detachment and estrangement in both cases is undeniable and 
ever increasing, being exacerbated by the ever more rapid and confused 
rhythm of existence in today's world. Thus it is significant that such 
phenomena are particularly severe in the upper classes and the remains 
of the ancient nobility, where one would have expected the bonds of 
blood and tradition to persist. It is more than a humorous remark that 
parents are "an unavoidable evil" for "modern" children. The new gen- 
eration wants its parents "to mind their own business" and not to med- 



V 



Marriage and the Family 187 

die in the lives of their children, since they "don't understand" (even 
when there is absolutely nothing to understand); and it is no longer just 
the boys who make such a claim: the girls too have filed a similar pro- 
test. Naturally, all this intensifies the general rootless condition. 
Therefore, the privation of any higher meaning of the family in a mate- 
rialistic and dispirited civilization is also one of the causes of the extrem- 
ism of the "burnt-out generation," and of the growing criminal activity 
and corruption among the youth. 

Given this state of affairs, whatever its principal cause — whether 
this cause lies in the children or the parents — procreation itself assumes 
an absurd character and cannot maintain its validity as one of the prin- 
cipal reasons of being for the family. Thus, as I have said, in innumer- 
able cases today's family owes its existence merely to a force of inertia, 
conventions, practical convenience, and weakness of character in a 
regime of mediocrity and compromises. Nor can one expect external 
measures to bring about a change. I must repeat that familial unity 
could only remain firm when determined by a suprapersonal way of 
thinking, so as to leave mere individual matters on a secondary level* 
Then the marriage could even lack "happiness," the "needs of the soul" 
could be unsatisfied, and yet the unity would persist. In the individual- 
istic climate of present society no higher reason demands that familial 
unity should persist even when the man or the woman "does not agree," 
and sentiment or sex leads them to new choices. Therefore, the increase 
of so-called failed marriages and related divorces and separations is 
natural in contemporary society. It is also absurd to think of any effi- 
cacy in restraining measures, since the basis of the whole is by now a 
change of an existential order. 

After this evaluation, it would almost be superfluous to specify what 
can be the behavior of the differentiated man today. In principle, he can- 
not value marriage, family, or procreation as I have just described them. 
All that can only be alien to him; he can recognize nothing significant 
to merit his attention. (Later I will return to the problem of the sexes in 
itself, not from the social perspective.) 

The contaminations in marriage between sacred and profane and 
its bourgeois conformism are evident to him, even in the case of religious, 
indissoluble, Catholic marriage. This indissolubility that is supposed 



188 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

to safeguard the family in the Catholic area is by now little more than 
a facade. In fact, the indissoluble unions are often profoundly cor- 
rupted and loosened, and in that area petty morality is not concerned 
in the least that the marriage is actually indissoluble; it is important 
only to act as if it were such. That men and women, once duly mar- 
ried, do more or less whatever they want, that they feign, betray, or 
simply put up with each other, that they remain together for simple 
convenience, reducing the family to what I have already described, is 
of little importance there. Morality is saved: One can believe that the 
family remains the fundamental unit of society so long as one con- 
demns divorce and accepts that social sanction or authorization — as 
if it had any right — for any sexually based cohabitation that corre- 
sponds to marriage. What is more, even if we are not speaking of the 
"indissoluble" Catholic rite of marriage, but of a society that permits 
divorce, the hypocrisy persists; one worships at the altar of social con- 
formism even when men and women separate and remarry repeatedly 
for the most frivolous and ridiculous motives, as typically happens in 
the United States, so that marriage ends up being little more than a 
puritanical veneer for a regime of high prostitution or legalized free 
love. 

Nevertheless, the issue of Catholic marriage deserves some addi- 
tional theoretical and historical consideration to prevent ambiguity. 
Naturally in our case it is not the arguments of "free thinkers*' that 
turn us against this kind of marriage. 

Earlier I mentioned the contamination between the sacred and the 
profane. It is worth recalling that marriage as a rite and sacrament 
involving indissolubility took shape late in the history of the Church, 
and not before the twelfth century. The obligatory nature of the reli- 
gious rite for every union that wished to be considered more than mere 
concubinage was later still, declared at the Council of Trent (1563). For 
our purposes, this does not affect the concept of indissoluble marriage 
in itself, but its place, significance, and conditions have to be clarified. 
The consequence here, as in other cases regarding the sacraments, is 
that the Catholic Church finds itself facing a singular paradox: pro- 
posals intending to make the profane sacred have practically ended up 
making the sacred profane. 



* 



5 



u 



Marriage and the Family 189 

The true, traditional significance of the marriage rite is outlined 
by Saint Paul, when he uses not the term "sacrament" but rather "mys- 
tery" to indicate it ("it is a great mystery," taken verbatim — Ephesians 
5:31-32). One can indeed allow a higher idea of marriage as a sacred 
and indissoluble union not in words, but in fact. A union of this type, 
however, is conceivable only in exceptional cases in which that absolute, 
almost heroic dedication of two people in life and beyond life is present 
in principle. This was known in more than one traditional civilization, 
with examples of wives who even found it natural not to outlive the 
death of their husbands. 

In speaking of making the sacred profane, I alluded to the fact that 
the concept of an indissoluble sacramental union, "written in the heav- 
ens" (as opposed to one on the naturalistic plane that is generically sen- 
timental, and even at base merely social), has been applied to, or rather 
imposed on, every couple who must join themselves in church rather 
than in civil marriage, only to conform to their social environment. It 
is pretended that on this exterior and prosaic plane, on this plane of 
the Nietzschean "human, all too human," the attributes of truly sacred 
marriage, of marriage as a "mystery," can and must be valid. When 
divorce is not permitted in a society like the present, one can expect this 
hypocritical regime and the rise of grave personal and social problems. 

On the other hand, it should be noted that in Catholicism itself the 
theoretical absoluteness of the marriage rite bears a significant limita- 
tion. It is enough to remember that if the Church insists on the indis- 
solubility of the marriage bond in space, denying divorce, it has ceased 
to observe it in time. The Church that does not allow one to divorce and 
remarry does permit widows and widowers to remarry, which amounts 
to a breach of faithfulness, and is at best conceivable within an openly 
materialistic premise; in other words, only if it is thought that when 
one who was indissolubly united by the supernatural power of the rite 
has died, he or she has ceased to exist. This inconsistency shows that 
Catholic religious law, far from truly having transcendent spiritual val- 
ues in view, has made the sacrament into a simple, social convenience, 
an ingredient of the profane life, reducing it to a mere formality, or 
rather degrading it* 

This is not all. Together with the absurdity proper to democratizing 



190 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

the marriage rite and imposing it on all, there is an inconsistency in 
Catholic doctrine when it claims that the rite, as well as being indissolu- 
ble, renders natural unions "sacred" — which represents one incongru- 
ence associating with another. Through precise, dogmatic premises, the 
"sacred" is here reduced to a mere manner of speech. It is well known 
that Christian and Catholic attitudes are characterized by the antithesis 
between "flesh" and spirit, by a theological hatred for sex, due to the 
illegitimate extension to ordinary life of a principle valid at best for a 
certain type of ascetic life. With sex being presented as something sinful, 
marriage has been conceived as a lesser evil, a concession to human 
weakness for those who cannot choose chastity as a way of life, and 
renounce sex. Not being able to ban sexuality altogether, Catholicism 
has tried to reduce it to a mere biological fact, allowing its use in mar- 
riage only for procreation. Unlike certain ancient traditions, Catholicism 
has recognized no higher value, not even a potential one, in the sexual 
experience taken in itself. There is lacking any basis for its transforma- 
tion in the interests of a more intense life, to integrate and elevate the 
inner tension of two beings of different sexes, whereas it is in exactly 
these terms that one should conceive of a concrete "sacralization" of the 
union and the effect of a higher influence involved in the rite. 

On the other hand, since the marriage rite has been democratized, 
the situation could not be otherwise even if the premises were differ- 
ent; otherwise, it would be necessary to suppose an almost magical 
power in the rite to automatically elevate the sexual experiences of any 
couple to the level of a higher tension, of a transforming intoxication 
that alone could lift it beyond the "natural" plane. The sexual act 
would constitute the primary element, whereas procreation would 
appear absolutely secondary and belonging to the naturalistic plane. 
As a whole, whether through its conception of sexuality, or through its 
profanation of the marriage rite as something put in everyone's reach 
and even rendered obligatory for any Catholic couple, religious mar- 
riage itself is reduced to the mere religious sanction of a profane, 
unbreakable contract. Thus the Catholic precepts about the relations 
between the sexes reduce everything to the plane of a restrained, bour- 
geois mediocrity: tamed, procreative animality within conformist lim- 
its that have not been fundamentally changed by certain hesitant, 



Marriage and the Family 191 

fringe concessions made for the sake of "updating" at the Second 
Vatican Council. 

So much for clarifying the principles of the matter* In such a mate- 
rialized and desecrated civilization and society as the present ones, it is 
then natural that the very barriers against dissolution that the Christian 
conception of marriage and family provided — however problematic it 
might have been — have become less and less, and that as things now 
stand, there is no longer anything worth being sincerely defended and 
preserved. None of the consequences of the crisis as seen in this realm, 
including all today's problems surrounding divorce, free love, and the 
rest, can be of much interest to the differentiated man. Upon final anal- 
ysis, he cannot consider the overt individualistic disintegration of mar- 
riage as a worse evil than the line followed by the communist world, 
which, having liquidated the fads of free unions cultivated by early rev- 
olutionary, antibourgeois socialism, tended ever more to substitute the 
state or some collective for the family, while vindicating the "dignity" 
of the woman only as worker side by side with the man, and in terms 
of a mere reproductive mammal. In fact, in present-day Russia decora- 
tions as lofty as "Heroine of the Soviet Union" are being contemplated 
for fruitful women — even unmarried comrades — who have given at 
least ten babies to the world, which, if they desire, they can even rid 
themselves of by handing them over to the state, which supposes it can 
educate them more directly and rationally to make them into "Soviet 
men." It is known that a comment in Article 12 of the Soviet constitu- 
tion has essentially inspired such a view of the female sex: "Work, in 
other times considered as a useless or dishonorable labor, becomes a 
question of dignity, glory, a question of valor, heroism." The title of 
"Hero of Socialist Labor/' equaled by the "Hero of the Soviet Union," 
is the counterpart of the title just indicated bestowed upon the repro- 
ductive woman. These are the happy horizons offered as the alternative 
to the "decadence" and "corruption" of bourgeois capitalist society, 
where the family is dissolving amid anarchy, indifference, and the so- 
called sexual revolution of the younger generation, along with the dis- 
appearance of any organic link or principle of authority. 

In any case, these alternatives also lack any significance. In this 
epoch of dissolution it is hard for the differentiated man to become 



190 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

the marriage rite and imposing it on all, there is an inconsistency in 
Catholic doctrine when it claims that the rite, as well as being indissolu- 
ble, renders natural unions "sacred" — which represents one incongru- 
ence associating with another. Through precise, dogmatic premises, the 
"sacred" is here reduced to a mere manner of speech. It is well known 
that Christian and Catholic attitudes are characterized by the antithesis 
between "flesh" and spirit, by a theological hatred for sex, due to the 
illegitimate extension to ordinary life of a principle valid at best for a 
certain type of ascetic life. With sex being presented as something sinful, 
marriage has been conceived as a lesser evil, a concession to human 
weakness for those who cannot choose chastity as a way of life, and 
renounce sex. Not being able to ban sexuality altogether, Catholicism 
has tried to reduce it to a mere biological fact, allowing its use in mar- 
riage only for procreation. Unlike certain ancient traditions, Catholicism 
has recognized no higher value, not even a potential one, in the sexual 
experience taken in itself. There is lacking any basis for its transforma- 
tion in the interests of a more intense life, to integrate and elevate the 
inner tension of two beings of different sexes, whereas it is in exactly 
these terms that one should conceive of a concrete "sacralization" of the 
union and the effect of a higher influence involved in the rite. 

On the other hand, since the marriage rite has been democratized, 
the situation could not be otherwise even if the premises were differ- 
ent; otherwise, it would be necessary to suppose an almost magical 
power in the rite to automatically elevate the sexual experiences of any 
couple to the level of a higher tension, of a transforming intoxication 
that alone could lift it beyond the "natural" plane. The sexual act 
would constitute the primary element, whereas procreation would 
appear absolutely secondary and belonging to the naturalistic plane. 
As a whole, whether through its conception of sexuality, or through its 
profanation of the marriage rite as something put in everyone's reach 
and even rendered obligatory for any Catholic couple, religious mar- 
riage itself is reduced to the mere religious sanction of a profane, 
unbreakable contract. Thus the Catholic precepts about the relations 
between the sexes reduce everything to the plane of a restrained, bour- 
geois mediocrity: tamed, procreative animality within conformist lim- 
its that have not been fundamentally changed by certain hesitant, 



? 



* 



Marriage and the Family 191 

fringe concessions made for the sake of "updating" at the Second 
Vatican Council. 

So much for clarifying the principles of the matter. In such a mate- 
rialized and desecrated civilization and society as the present ones, it is 
then natural that the very barriers against dissolution that the Christian 
conception of marriage and family provided — however problematic it 
might have been — have become less and less, and that as things now 
stand, there is no longer anything worth being sincerely defended and 
preserved. None of the consequences of the crisis as seen in this realm, 
including all today's problems surrounding divorce, free love, and the 
rest, can be of much interest to the differentiated man. Upon final anal- 
ysis, he cannot consider the overt individualistic disintegration of mar- 
riage as a worse evil than the line followed by the communist world, 
which, having liquidated the fads of free unions cultivated by early rev- 
olutionary, antibourgeois socialism, tended ever more to substitute the 
state or some collective for the family, while vindicating the "dignity** 
of the woman only as worker side by side with the man, and in terms 
of a mere reproductive mammal. In fact, in present-day Russia decora- 
tions as lofty as "Heroine of the Soviet Union" are being contemplated 
for fruitful women — even unmarried comrades — who have given at 
least ten babies to the world, which, if they desire, they can even rid 
themselves of by handing them over to the state, which supposes it can 
educate them more directly and rationally to make them into "Soviet 
men." It is known that a comment in Article 12 of the Soviet constitu- 
tion has essentially inspired such a view of the female sex: "Work, in 
other times considered as a useless or dishonorable labor, becomes a 
question of dignity, glory, a question of valor, heroism." The title of 
"Hero of Socialist Labor," equaled by the "Hero of the Soviet Union," 
is the counterpart of the title just indicated bestowed upon the repro- 
ductive woman. These are the happy horizons offered as the alternative 
to the "decadence" and "corruption" of bourgeois capitalist society, 
where the family is dissolving amid anarchy, indifference, and the so- 
called sexual revolution of the younger generation, along with the dis- 
appearance of any organic link or principle of authority. 

In any case, these alternatives also lack any significance. In this 
epoch of dissolution it is hard for the differentiated man to become 



/ 



192 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

involved in marriage and family in any way. It is not a matter of osten- 
tatious anticonformism, but a conclusion drawn from a vision consis- 
tent with reality, in which the imperative of an inner freedom remains. 
In a world like the present, the differentiated man must be able to have 
the self at his disposal, all his life long. It is not for him to form any ties 
in this realm, any more than ascetics or mercenaries in another epoch 
would have done. It is not that he is unwilling to assume even graver 
burdens: the problem refers instead to that which, in itself, is devoid of 
any meaning. 

This saying of Nietzsche is well known; "Nicht fort sollst du dicb 
pflanzen, sondern hinauf Dazu helfe dir der Garten der Ehe" (Do not 
plant for the future but for the heights. May the garden of marriage help 
you in that). It refers to the idea that today's man is a mere form of 
transition whose only purpose is to prepare the birth of the "super- 
man," being ready to sacrifice himself for him, and to withdraw at his 
arising. We have already done justice to the craze of the superman and 
this finaiism that postpones the possession of an absolute meaning of 
existence to a hypothetical future humanity. But from the wordplay of 
Nietzsche's saying, one can deduce the endorsement of a concept that 
marriage should serve to reproduce not "horizontally" (such is the 
meaning of fortpflanzen)^ simply breeding, but rather "vertically," 
toward the summit (hinaufpflanzen), elevating one's own line. In fact, 
this would be the only higher justification of marriage and family. 
Today it is nonexistent, because of the objective existential situation of 
which we have spoken, and because of the processes of dissolution that 
have severed the profound ties that can spiritually unite the generations. 
Even a Catholic, Charles Peguy, had spoken of being a father as the 
"great adventure of modern man," given the utter uncertainty of what 
his own offspring may be, given the improbability that in our day the 
child might receive anything more than mere "life" from the father. I 
have already emphasized that it is not about having or not having that 
paternal quality, not only physical, that existed in the ancient family 
and that grounded his authority. Even if this quality were still present — 
and, in principle, one should assume that it could still be present in the 
differentiated man — it would be paralyzed by the presence of a refrac- 
tory and dissociated material in the younger generation. As we have 



Marriage and the Family 193 

said, the state of the modern masses is by now such that, even if figures 
having the stature of true leaders were to appear, they would be the last 
to be followed. Thus one should not deceive oneself about the forma- 
tion and education still possible for an offspring born in an environ- 
ment like that of present society, even if the father were such in a more 
than legal sense. 

The objection that such a position could provoke is certainly not 
that it involves the danger of a depopulation of the earth, because there 
is more than a sufficient pandemic and catastrophic reproduction of 
common humanity, but that thus the differentiated men would renounce 
the assurance of a lineage that would carry on the heritage of their ideas 
and way of being, leaving the masses and the most insignificant classes 
to breed their ever more numerous progeny. 

One can overcome this objection by dissociating the physical gen- 
eration from the spiritual one. In a regime of dissolution, in a world 
where neither castes, traditions, nor races exist in the proper sense, the 
two types of generation have ceased to be parallel, and the hereditary 
continuity of blood no longer represents a favorable condition for a 
spiritual continuity. We might refer here to that spiritual paternity to 
which the traditional world accorded priority over solely biological 
paternity, as when speaking of the relationship between teacher and 
student, initiator and initiate. This extended to the idea of a rebirth or 
second birth as a fact independent of any physical paternity, and which 
created in the person concerned a more intimate and essential tie than 
any of those that could unite him to the physical father, the family, or 
any naturalistic community and unity. 

This, then, is the special possibility that can be considered as a sub- 
stitute: it goes back to an order of ideas analogous to the principle of 
the nation, when we said that a naturalistic unity entering crisis could 
only be replaced by a unity determined by an idea. To the "adventure 
of physically procreating beings who may become isolated, "modern 
individuals good only for increasing the senseless world of quantity, one 
can then oppose the action of awakening, which those who do not spiri- 
tually belong to the present world may exert on suitably qualified peo- 
ple, so that the physical disappearance of the former does not leave an 
unfilled void. Besides, the few differentiated men existing today rarely 



vt 



it 



194 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

find themselves sharing their inner form and orientation on account of 
sharing the same blood or stock, through heredity. So there is no rea- 
son to suppose that things should go otherwise for the next generation. 
However important the task of assuring oneself a spiritual succession 
is, its practicability depends on circumstances. It will be realized if and 
where it can be, without one having to search frantically and, least 
of all, resort to any kind of proselytism. Above all in this realm, that 
which is authentic and valid is accomplished under the guidance of a 
higher, inscrutable wisdom, with the external appearance of casuality, 
rather than through a direct initiative "willed" by any individual* 






----? * 
'- -i" f 






28 

Relations 
between the Sexes 



I have taken care to distinguish the social problem of the family and mar- 
riage from the personal problem of sex* Once again, it is a matter of a 
separation that, neither normal nor legitimate in a normal world, except 
in special cases, imposes itself when the world is dissolving. So we come 
to consider the relationship between man and woman in itself. 

Here too, I will first consider the positive aspects that, at least 
potentially, are offered by certain processes of dissolution, to the extent 
that what is dissolved belongs to the bourgeois world and, moreover, 
suffers from distortions and obscurities in sexual matters, due to the 
predominant religion of the West. 

I turn first to that characteristic complex caused by the interference 
between morality and sexuality, as well as that between spirituality and 
sexuality. The importance that has been attributed to sexual matters 
in the field of ethical and spiritual values, often to the point of making 
them the sole criterion, is nothing less than aberrant. 

Vilfredo Pare to 1 spoke of a "sexual religion" that in the nineteenth 
century, with its taboos, dogmas, and intolerance, accompanied reli- 
gion as usually understood. It was particularly virulent in Anglo-Saxon 
countries, where it had, and in part still has as its worthy companions, 
two other brand-new, dogmatic, secular religions: humanitarian pro- 
gressivism and the religion of democracy. But, apart from this, there 
are distortions concerning a much wider field. For example, one of 
them concerns the very meaning of the term "virtue." 2 It is known that 
virtus in antiquity and even during the Renaissance had the meaning 
of a force of the soul, of virile quality, of power, while later its preva- 
lent meaning became sexual, so much that Pareto could coin the term 



195 



196 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

"virtuism" itself to characterize the said puritanical religion. Another 
typical case of the interference between sexuality and ethics and of the 
distortion of them is the notion of honor. It is true that this primarily 
concerned the female sex, but the matter was no less significant for 
that. For a long time it was held, and still is in certain social strata 
and regions, that a girl loses her "honor" not only when she has free 
sexual experiences outside of marriage, but even when she is a victim 
of rape. A similar absurdity even inspired the theme of some "great 
art," the grotesque extreme of this perhaps being reached by Lope de 
Vega's drama The Best Judge Is the King, in which a girl, having been 
kidnapped and violated by a feudal lord, loses her "honor"; but she 
quickly regains it when the king has the rapist executed and has the girl 
marry her fiance, A parallel absurdity is the idea that a man loses his 
own "honor" if his wife betrays him, whereas, if anything, the oppo- 
site would be true; in adultery, it is the woman, and not the man who 
loses "honor": not by the sexual fact itself, but from a superior point 
of view, because where marriage is something serious and profound, 
the woman in marrying freely binds herself to a man, and through 
her adultery she, first disgracing herself, breaks this ethical tie. So, 
incidentally, one can see how foolish it was of the bourgeois world to 
let the blow land on the betrayed husband. It would be equivalent to 
ridiculing one who suddenly discovers a thief, or a leader when one of 
his followers breaks his oath of fidelity and betrays him — unless one 
wants the defense of "honor" to engender in the husband the quality 
of a jailer or a despot, which is certainly not compatible with a higher 
ideal of virile dignity. 

Even from such banal examples we can clearly see the contamina- 
tion suffered by ethical values through sexual prejudices. I have already 
indicated the principles of a "greater morality" that, being dependent 
on a kind of interior race, cannot be damaged by nihilistic dissolu- 
tions: these include truth, justice, loyalty, inner courage, the authen- 
tic, socially unconditioned sentiment of honor and shame, control over 
oneself. These are what are meant by "virtue"; sexual acts have no part 
in it except indirectly, and only when they lead to a behavior that devi- 
ates from these values. 

The value that was attributed to virginity by Western religion, even 



Relations oetween we sexes iy/ 



v 



on a theological plane, relates to the complex mentioned earlier. It is 
already evident on this plane through the importance and the emphasis 
on the virginity of Mary, the "Mother of God," which is altogether 
incomprehensible except on the purely symbolic level. But it was also 
attested on the moral and normative plane by many opinions recog- 
nized as "probable" by Catholic moral theology (that is, recommended 
because prevalent and defended by thinkers of a particular doctrine, 
although not unequivocally binding). For example, it would be prefer- 
able for a girl to kill herself rather than allow herself to be violated 
(an idea that even led to the recent "sanctification" of a certain Maria 
Goretti), or that it would be permissible for her to kill the assailant, if 
she could save her own anatomical integrity thereby. A similar senti- 
ment is defended in the same terms by the casuistry of moral theology 
that, when for the salvation of a city the enemy had required the sacri- 
fice of an innocent, she could be sacrificed and the city could consent 
to surrender her — not, however, if a girl were demanded in order to be 
raped. So we can see that the sexual taboo was given a greater emphasis 
than life itself, and many more examples of this could easily be pro- 
vided. But when, with a regime of interdictions and anathemas, one 
is so preoccupied with sexual matters, it is evident that one depends 
on them, no less than if one made a crude exhibition of them. On the 
whole, this is the case in Christianized Europe — and all the more so 
since positive religion lacks both the contemplative potential and the 
orientation toward transcendence, high asceticism, and true sacrality. 
The realm of morality has become contaminated by the idea of sex, to 
the extent of the complexes mentioned earlier. 

Although all this abnormal order of things is not of recent date, the 
characteristic fact of the bourgeois period is that it assumed the principal, 
dissociated, and autonomous characteristics of a "social morality" — pre- 
cisely with the "virtuism" of which Pareto accuses it, which to a certain 
extent was no longer subject to religious morality. Now, it is exactly this 
morality with a sexual basis that is the principal object of the processes 
of dissolution in recent times. We hear of a "sexual revolution" supposed 
to remove both inner inhibitions and repressive social taboos. In fact, in 
today's world "sexual freedom" is being affirmed ever more, as a current 
practice. But we have to consider this in more detail. 



198 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

I must emphasize above all that the direction of the processes at 
work is toward a freeing of sex, but in no way a freeing from sex. 3 Sex 
and women are instead becoming dominant forces in present society, 
an evident fact that is also part of the general phenomenology of every 
terminal phase of a civilization's cycle. One might speak of a chronic 
sexual intoxication that is profusely manifested in public life, conduct, 
and art. Its counterpart is a gynocratic tendency, a sexually oriented 
preeminence of the woman that relates to the materialistic and practi- 
cal involvement of the masculine sex: a phenomenon that is clearest in 
those countries, like the United States, where that involvement is more 
excessive. 

Since I have dealt with it on other occasions, 4 I shall not dwell on 
this subject here, limiting myself to the collective and, in a certain way, 
abstract character of eroticism and the fascination centered on the latest 
female idols, in an atmosphere fed by countless means: cinema, maga- 
zines, television, musicals, beauty contests, and so on. Here the real 
persona of the woman is often a quasi-soulless prop, center of crystal- 
lization of that atmosphere of diffuse and chronic sexuality, so that the 
majority of "stars" with their fascinating features have as persons quite 
poor sexual qualities, their existential basis being close to that of com- 
mon, misguided, and rather neurotic girls. To describe them someone 
has aptly used the image of jellyfish with magnificent iridescent colors 
that are reduced to a gelatinous mass and evaporate if brought out of 
the water into sunlight — the water corresponding to the atmosphere of 
diffuse and collective sexuality, 5 

As for our concerns, my principle is not simply to deplore the fact 
that all the mores of the past based on sexual prejudices are ever more 
losing their force; and it should not surprise us that what seemed corrup- 
tion yesterday is now becoming normal in much of contemporary society. 
The important thing would be to take advantage of the changed situation 
in order to affirm a healthier conception of life than that of bourgeois 
morality, by freeing ethical values from their sexual connections. What 
was said of the contamination suffered by that morality's interference with 
the concepts of virtue, honor, and fidelity, can already indicate the right 
direction. We must recognize that continence and chastity have their 
proper place only in the framework of a certain type of ascesis and in the 



v 




Relations between the Sexes 199 

uncommon vocations corresponding to it, as was always thought in the 
traditional world. Contrary to puritanical opinion, a free sexual life in 
the case of persons of a certain stature can tell us nothing about their 
intrinsic value — history is rich in examples of that. What they allow 
themselves should be measured solely by what they are, by the power that 
they have over themselves. 

Relationships between men and women, with regard to living 
together, should be clearer, more important, and interesting than those 
defined by bourgeois mores and sexual exclusivism, which understands 
the significance of female integrity in mere anatomical terms. In prin- 
ciple, the processes of dissolution at work could favor many similar 
rectifications, if one has a particular human type in sight. However, if 
one refers to the majority, those possibilities remain entirely hypotheti- 
cal, because here too, the necessary existential premises are lacking. 
Today's situation is such that increased freedom in the realm of sex is 
not connected to a conscious reacquisition of values that accord little 
importance to "important" sexual matters and oppose the "fetishiza- 
tion" of intersexual human relations, but is caused by the general weak- 
ening of any value, of any restraint. The positive advantages that might 
be drawn from the processes at work are then only virtual, and should 
not delude us about the actual — and future — tendencies of modern life. 
Aside from the atmosphere of a diffuse, pandemic, erotic intoxication, 
"sexual freedom" can lead to banal relationships between men and 
women, to a materialism, a petty immoralism, and an insipid promis- 
cuity where the most elementary conditions for sexual experiences of 
any interest or intensity do not exist. It is easy to see that this is the 
effective outcome of the proclaimed "sexual revolution": sex "free of 
complexes" that becomes a general current of mass consumption. 

The aspects of the crisis of female modesty are another part of 
this. 6 Beside the cases in which almost full female nudity feeds the 
atmosphere of abstract, collective sexuality, we should consider those 
cases in which nudity has lost every serious "functional" character — 
cases which by their habitual, public character almost engender an 
involuntarily chaste glance that is capable of considering a fully 
undressed girl with the same aesthetic disinterest as observing a fish 
or a cat. Furthermore, by adding the products of commercialized mass 



200 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

pornography, the polarity between the sexes is diluted, as seen in the 
conduct of "modern" life where the youth of both sexes are every- 
where intermingled, promiscuously and "unaffectedly," with almost 
no tension, as if they were turnips and cabbages in a vegetable garden. 
We can see how this particular result of the processes of dissolution 
relates to what I have said of the "animal ideal," as well as the corre- 
spondence between the East and the West. The primitive, erotic life so 
typical among American youth is not at all far from the promiscuity 
of male and female "comrades" in the communist realm, free from 
the "individualistic accidents of bourgeois decadence," who in the end 
reflect little on sexual matters, their prevalent interests being chan- 
neled elsewhere into collective life and class. 7 

We can consider separately the cases in which the climate of dif- 
fuse and constant eroticism leads one to seek in pure sexuality, more 
or less along the same lines as drugs, frantic sensations that mask the 
emptiness of modern existence. The testimonies of certain beatniks and 
similar groups reveal that their pursuit of the sexual orgasm causes an 
anguish aroused by the idea that they and their partner might not reach 
it, even to the point of exhaustion. 

This use of sex deals with negative forms and quasi-caricatures that 
may, however, refer to something more serious, because the pure sexual 
experience also has its metaphysical value, the intensity of intercourse 
being able to produce an existential rupture of planes and an opening 
beyond ordinary consciousness. Along with the sacralization of sex, 
these possibilities were recognized in the traditional world. Having 
dealt with this in Eros and the Mysteries of Love^ I shall only include 
here a brief reference as it concerns the differentiated man. 

As I have said, the present situation excludes the possibility of inte- 
grating sex in a life full of meaning within institutional frameworks. So 
we can only think of certain cases in which, despite everything, favor- 
able conditions exceptionally and sporadically converge. Certainly, the 
romantic bourgeois idea of love as a union of "souls" can no longer 
have any place for the man in question. The significance of human 
relationships can only be relative to him, and he can no more seek the 
meaning of existence in a woman than in family and children. In par- 
ticular, he must put aside the idea, or ambition, of human possession, 



. --7 



Relations between the Sexes 201 

of completely "having" the other being as a person. Here too, a sense 
of distance would be natural, and could indicate a mutual respect. The 
positive use of the greater freedom of modern conduct and of the modern 
transformation of the woman can be seen in relationships that, without 
being superficial or "naturalistic," have an evident character, grounded 
on the social and ethical side in loyalty, camaraderie, independence, 
and courage. The man and woman always remain conscious as two 
beings with distinct paths, who, in the world in dissolution, can over- 
come their fundamental, existential isolation only through the effect of 
pure sexual polarity. If there is no need to "possess" another human 
being, the woman will not be a mere object of "pleasure," a source of 
sensations that are sought as means to assert oneself. The integrated 
being has no need of such assurances; at most he requires "nourish- 
ment." That which can be gained from the polarity just mentioned, if 
adequately used, can provide one of the principal materials to feed that 
special active and living intoxication of which I have repeatedly spoken, 
above all when discussing the Dionysian experience. 

This brings us to the other possibility, that offered by the regime 
of sexuality that renders it in a certain way autonomous, and detached. 
As we have seen, the first possibility is "naturalistic" degeneracy. This 
contrasts with the second possibility, which is that of the "elementary": 
the assumption of the sexual experience in its elementarily. One of the 
themes of Eros and the Mysteries of Love was shown in the words: 
"Since psychoanalysis has emphasized the subpersonal primordialism 
of sex by applying a degrading inversion, it is necessary to oppose it 
with a metaphysical perspective." 8 On the one hand, I have examined 
to this end certain dimensions of transcendence that exist in latent or 
hidden forms in profane love itself, while on the other hand I have gath- 
ered from the world of Tradition many testimonies about the use of sex 
in the sense indicated, when I spoke of how higher influences could 
transform the general rule of union between men and women. If, how- 
ever, we do not want to deal with mere concepts, but with their practi- 
cal application, today I can only refer to sporadic, unusual experiences 
open only to the differentiated human type, because they presuppose a 
special interior constitution that survives in him alone. 

Another presupposition regards the woman: it is that the erotic, 



202 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

fascinating quality widespread in today's environment is concentrated 
and almost "precipitated" (in a chemical sense) in certain female types 
precisely in terms of an "elementary" quality. Therefore, in a sexual 
relationship with a woman, the situation I have often considered would 
reappear — that is, a dangerous situation that requires a self-mastery, 
the surpassing of an inner limit by anyone who intends actively to 
attempt it. Despite a certain exasperation or crudeness due to the dif- 
ferent environment, the meanings originally connected to the polarity 
of the sexes could reappear in this context, if not yet suffocated by the 
puritan religion of the "spirit," and if they were not enfeebled, senti- 
mentalized, and made bourgeois, but also not primitivized or simply 
corrupted. These significances are found in many legends, myths, and 
sagas of very different traditions. In the true, typical, absolute woman, 
they recognized a spiritually dangerous presence, a fascinating and 
even dissolutive force; this explains the attitude and the precepts of that 
particular line of ascesis averse to sex and woman, as if to cut off their 
danger. The man who has not chosen either to renounce the world or 
to be impassively detached from it can face the danger and even derive 
nourishment from the poison, if he uses sex without becoming a slave 
to it, and if he is able to evoke the profound, elemental dimensions in a 
certain transbiological sense. 

As I have said, in the present world these possibilities are the excep- 
tion and can only offer themselves by happy chance, given their presup- 
positions, and also under the unfavorable circumstances of the dullness 
often presented by the woman as current civilization has made her. An 
"absolute woman" cannot in fact easily imagine herself in the guise of 
an "up-to-date" and "modern" girl. More generally, she cannot easily 
imagine the necessary feminine qualities mentioned earlier as compat- 
ible with those required for relationships that, as we have said, should 
also have a character of freedom, clarity, and independence. As a result, 
an entirely unique form of woman would be necessary, a seemingly 
paradoxical form, because in a certain sense she should reproduce that 
"duality" (inner duality) of the differentiated male type; which, despite 
certain appearances, is far from the typical orientation of modern 
woman's life. 

In reality, the entrance of the woman with equal rights into practi- 



Relations between the Sexes 203 

cal modern life, her new freedom, her finding herself side by side with 
men in the streets, offices, professions, factories, sports, and now even 
in political and military life, is one of those dissolutive phenomena in 
which, in most cases, it is difficult to perceive anything positive. In 
essence, all this is simply the renunciation of the woman's right to be 
a woman. The promiscuity of the sexes in modern existence can only 
"relieve" the woman to a greater or lesser degree of the energy with 
which she is endowed; she enters freer relationships only by regressing, 
because they are primitivized, prejudiced by all the factors and the prac- 
tical, predominating interests of modern life. So the processes at work 
in present society, with woman's new status, can satisfy only one of the 
two requirements, that of clearer, freer, and more essential relationships, 
beyond both moralism and the erosive quality of bourgeois sentimental- 
ism and "idealism," but certainly cannot satisfy the second — the activa- 
tion of the most profound forces that define the absolute woman. 

It lies outside of the scope of this book to consider the meaning 
of existence not only from the man's point of view, but also from the 
woman's. It is certain that in an epoch of dissolution the solution for 
the woman is more difficult than that for the man. One should bear in 
mind the already irreversible consequences of the error through which 
the woman believed herself to win a "personality" of her own using the 
man as a model: the "man," in a manner of speaking, because today's 
typical forms of activity are almost all anodyne, they engage "neuter" 
faculties of a predominantly intellectual and practical order that have no 
specific relation to either sex, or even to any particular race or nation- 
ality, and are exercised under the sign of the absurdity that character- 
izes all the systems of contemporary society. It is a world of existence 
without quality and of mere masks, in which the modern woman in 
most cases simply takes care of the cosmetic aspect, being so inwardly 
diminished and displaced, and lacking any basis for that active and 
essentializing depersonalization of which I have spoken, regarding the 
relations between person and mask. 

In an inauthentic existence, the regime of diversions, surrogates, 
and tranquilizers that pass for today's "distractions" and "amusements" 
does not yet allow the modern woman to foresee the crisis that awaits 
her when she recognizes how meaningless are those male occupations 



204 Dissolution in the Social Realm 

for which she has fought, when the illusions and the euphoria of her 
conquests vanish, and when she realizes that, given the climate of dis- 
solution, family and children can no longer give her a sense of satisfac- 
tion in life. Meanwhile, as a result of diminished tension even man and 
sex can no longer mean a great deal to her; they cannot be her natural 
center of existence as they were for the traditional absolute woman, but 
can only be of value as one ingredient of a diffused and externalized 
existence, no more important than fashion, sport, a narcissistic cult of 
the body, practical interests, and so on. The destructive effects so often 
produced in modern women by a mistaken vocation or warped ambi- 
tions, and also the force of circumstances, enter into the equation. Thus, 
when the race of true men is also nearly extinct, and modern man has 
little left of virility in a higher sense, there is little point in the saying 
about the true man's capacity to "redeem," to "save the woman within 
woman." There is more of a danger that a true man today, in many 
cases, might find appropriate another maxim, that spoken by the old 
woman to Zarathustra: "Are you going to women? Don't forget your 
whip!" 9 — if it could be applied with impunity and fruitfully in these 
progressive times. The possibility of restoring to sex, even sporadically, 
its elementarity, its transcendence, and perhaps even its danger in the 
context mentioned, appears very much prejudiced by all these factors. 

In summary, the general picture tnat today's society presents in the 
field of sex reflects in a particular way the negative aspects of a period 
of transition. The regime of residues, influenced in Latin countries by 
Catholic and bourgeois conformism, and by Puritanism in Protestant 
countries, still possesses a certain force. Where only the outer inhibi- 
tions have been removed, sexual life frequently assumes neurotic forms. 
In the opposite case of the younger generation's completely emancipated 
behavior, without complexes, the tendency is toward an insipid natu- 
ralism and primitivism in sexual relations. At the same time the gen- 
eral climate prevails of a fascination with sex and the predominance of 
woman as its object, without any effective differentiation, often to the 
point of regression, of the absolute types of femininity and virility. In 
particular, the emancipated feminine element becomes dimmed when 
involved in the social mechanism. Finally, there are the marginal cases 
of an exasperated use of sex, often associated with drugs, by a youth 



Relations between the Sexes 205 

that is existentially traumatized and at risk, in the context of a chaotic 
search for surrogates for a firm sense of existence. 

Thus in the current situation, for the type that concerns us, the pros- 
pect of the use of more profound sexual possibilities in freer and clearer 
relationships between men and women can only occur in rare, unex- 
pected cases. Apart from this, considering the current processes and 
their effects, the only ones of value to him are those disintegrating ones 
that may help to separate the realms, and which articulate the principles 
belonging to a higher law of life than the preceding sexual morality. 
Lacking anything better, he takes stock of the free space that is opened 
when important sexual and erotic matters are rendered less important, 
though not discounting what they can offer on their own level. 



-.*?<; 



Part 8 



The Spiritua 
Problem 



29 
The "Second Religiosity" 



In chapter 191 showed how utterly baseless is the idea of certain popu- 
larizers of the latest physics, who claim that it has graduated beyond 
its previous materialism and is leading toward a new, spiritual vision of 
reality. Now a similar deception lies at the basis of the pretences of what 
we might call "neospiritualism," 1 In some circles the same conclusion 
is drawn, namely that we are returning to spirituality, because of the 
proliferating tendencies toward the supernatural and the supersensible 
on the part of movements, cults, sects, lodges, and conventicles of every 
description. They have in common the ambition to supply Western man 
with something more than the forms of positive and dogmatic religion, 
reckoned inadequate, empty, and inefficient, and to lead him beyond 
materialism. 

This too is an illusion, caused by the lack of principles so typical of 
our contemporaries. The truth is that here too, we are facing phenom- 
ena that in most cases are part and parcel of the dissolving processes of 
the age, and that despite all appearances have an existentially negative 
character, representing a kind of counterpart in alliance with Western 
materialism. 

To understand the true place and significance of this new spiritu- 
alism, one can refer to what Spengler wrote about the "second religi- 
osity." In his principal work, The Decline of the West, this author 
expounded ideas that, for all their grave confusions and personal 
digressions of every kind, partly reproduce the traditional conception 
of history. He speaks there of a process in the various cycles of civili- 
zation that leads from the organic forms of life at their origin, in 
which quality, spirituality, living tradition, and race prevail, to late 
and soulless urban forms in which the abstract intellect, economy and 
finance, pragmatism, and the world of the masses predominate, resting 



208 




The "Second Religiosity" 209 

on a grandeur that is purely material. When such forms appear, a civi- 
lization is heading for its end. The terminal state has been characterized 
more forcibly by Guenon, 2 who, using an image drawn from the decom- 
position of organisms, mentions two phases: first that of rigor mortis 
(corresponding in civilization to the period of materialism), and follow- 
ing that the ultimate phase in which the corpse disintegrates. 

According to Spengler, one of the phenomena that consistently 
accompanies the terminal phase of a civilization is the "second religios- 
ity." On the fringes of structures of barbaric grandeur — rationalism, 
practical atheism, and materialism — there spring up sporadic forms of 
spirituality and mysticism, even irruptions from the supersensible, which 
do not indicate a re-ascent but are symptoms of decay. Their expres- 
sions no longer take their stamp from the religion of the origins, from 
the severe forms inherited from the dominating elites who stood at the 
center of an organic and qualitative civilization (this being exactly what 
I call the world of Tradition)* In the phase in question, even the posi- 
tive religions lose any higher dimension; they become secularized, one- 
dimensional, and cease to exercise their original functions. The "second 
religiosity" develops outside them — often even in opposition to them — 
but also outside the principal and predominant currents of existence, 
and signifies, in general, a phenomenon of escapism, alienation, and 
confused compensation that in no way impinges seriously on the reality 
of a soulless, mechanistic, and purely earthly civilization. This then is 
the place and the sense of the "second religiosity." The picture can be 
completed by referring to Guenon, an author of far deeper doctrine than 
Spengler. He has stated that after nineteenth-century materialism and 
positivism had closed man off to what was effectively above him — the 
truly supernatural, the transcendent — the many twentieth-century cur- 
rents appearing under the guise of "spirituality" or "new psychology" 
tended to open him up to that which was beneath him — beneath the 
existential level that generally corresponds to the complete human being. 
One might also use an expression of Aldous Huxley, who speaks of a 
"self-transcendence downwards" as opposed to a "self-transcendence 
upwards." 

Since the West truly finds itself today in the soulless, collectivistic, and 
materialistic phase corresponding to the closing of a cycle of civilization, 



210 The Spiritual Problem 

there can be no doubt that the great majority of facts interpreted as the 
prelude to a new spirituality simply belong to this "second religiosity." 
They represent something promiscuous, fragmented, and subintellectual; 
they resemble the fluorescence that appears when corpses decompose. 
Thus the currents in question should not be seen as counteracting our 
present twilight civilization, but as its counterpart, and if they take hold, 
they might even be the prelude to a more acute phase of regression and 
dissolution. This is so particularly when it is not merely a matter of states 
of mind and theories, but when a morbid interest in the sensational and 
the occult is accompanied by practicing evocations and opening up the 
underground strata of the human psyche — as happens not infrequently 
in spiritualism and even in psychoanalysis. Here one may well speak, 
with Guenon, of "fissures in the Great Wall," 3 dangerous faults in that 
protecting barrier that, despite everything, protects every normal and 
sound-minded person in ordinary life from the action of genuine dark 
forces that are hidden behind the facade of the sense-world and beneath 
the threshold of sound and conscious human thoughts. From this point 
of view, neospiritualism appears even more dangerous than materialism 
or positivism, whose primitivity and intellectual myopia at least serve to 
reinforce that "wall" which, while limiting, also protects. 

In another respect, nothing is more indicative of the level of this 
neospiritualism than the human material of the majority of those who 
cultivate it. While the ancient sciences had the prerogative of a superior 
humanity drawn from the royal and priestly castes, today's new anti- 
materialist gospel is bandied about by mediums, popular "maguses," 
dowsers, spiritists, Anthroposophists, newspaper astrologers and seers, 
Theosophists, "healers," popularizers of an Americanized yoga, and 
so forth, accompanied by a few exalted mystics and extemporizing 
prophets. Mystification and superstition are constantly mingled in 
neospiritualism, another of whose typical traits, especially in Anglo- 
Saxon countries, is the high percentage of women (women who are 
failures, dropouts, or "past it"). In fact, its general orientation may well 
be described as a "feminine" spirituality. 

This is a topic I have already addressed and explained on many 
occasions. For the order of ideas that concerns us here, all that matters 
is to lay bare the appalling confusion that can arise from the frequent 




The "Second Religiosity" 211 

references in neospiritualism stemming from Anglo-Indian Theosophy, 
to certain doctrines related to what I call the world of Tradition, par- 
ticularly in its Eastern varieties. 

Now a clear distinction is necessary* Whatever of Tradition is to be 
found in the currents in question is nearly always reduced to counter- 
feits of those doctrines, to residues or fragments of them mixed in with 
the worst of Western prejudices and with purely personal divagations* 
Neospiritualism in general has not the slightest notion of the plane to 
which the ideas it borrows truly belong, any more than of what its fol- 
lowers are really seeking. Such ideas usually end up as mere surrogates 
for the same needs as propel others toward faith and simple religion — a 
serious error, because the ideas really concern metaphysics, and, quite 
often, those teachings that even in the traditional world belonged exclu- 
sively to the esoteric doctrines that were not divulged. Besides, while it 
is said that the reason the neospiritualists are interested in promulgat- 
ing them and even taking them into the marketplace is to be found in 
the decadence and aridity of Western religion, another reason is that 
many of them believe that these teachings are more "open" and consol- 
ing, and that they exempt one from the duties and bonds belonging to 
the positive faiths; whereas the opposite is the case, even if it is a matter 
of very different bonds. A typical example is the kind of moralizing, 
humanitarian, and pacifist values recently attached to the Buddhist 
doctrine (according to Nehru, Buddhism is "the only alternative to the 
H-bomb"). On a different level, we see someone like Jung "valuing" 
in psychoanalytic terms every type of mystery teaching and symbol, 
adapting them for the treatment of neurotic and schizoid individuals, 

After all this, one has to wonder about how far the practical effect 
of neospiritualism is negative in another direction: that of throwing 
discredit on the teachings concerned, which are traceable to the esoteric 
doctrines of the world of Tradition, because of the distorted and spuri- 
ous way in which they have been publicized and propagandized by the 
currents in question. One must in fact have a very precise inner orien- 
tation, and no less precise an instinct, to be capable of separating the 
positive from the negative, and of gaining from these currents an incen- 
tive toward a true reconnection with the origins and the rediscovery of 
a lost knowledge. And should this occur, and one enter the right path, 



212 The Spiritual Problem 

one should not hesitate to abandon everything to do with that casual 
point of departure, that is, the spiritualism of today and especially the 
spiritual level corresponding to it: a level that is completely alien to the 
grandeur, the power, the severe and sovereign character proper to that 
which is situated, in effect, beyond the human, and which alone can 
open a way beyond the world that is still living out the "death of God." 

This will suffice regarding the doctrinal plane; and the differenti- 
ated man with whom we are concerned, if his attention is drawn to that 
domain, should be quite clear about the distinction made here. Should 
he lack more direct and authentic sources of information, beyond the 
by-products and the ambiguous glamour of the "second religiosity/ 5 he 
will need to undertake a task of discrimination and integration. This 
task is at least made easier by the fact that the modern science of reli- 
gions and kindred disciplines have published the fundamental texts of 
various great traditions, in versions that may show their academic and 
specialist limitations (philology, orientalism, and so on), but that are 
free from the distortions, the irrelevancies, and the adulterations of 
neospiritualism. Thus one has the basis, the "materia prima" for going 
further after the initial and occasional impulse. 4 

There is also the practical problem to be considered. Neospiritualism 
often looks to practice and inner experience, borrowing from the differ- 
ent worlds of antiquity or the East not only ideas of the supersensible, 
but also paths and disciplines for removing the limits of ordinary human 
consciousness. Here is the same dubious situation as was mentioned in 
the context of Catholic rites that have ended up profaned and deprived 
of any effective "operative" significance, through being applied to the 
masses without considering the conditions required for their efficacy. 
In the present case the situation is even more dubious, because the goal 
is more ambitious. 

We can set aside the most spurious, "occultist" varieties of neospiri- 
tualism, dominated by the interest in "clairvoyance," in this or that 
supposed "power," and any kind of contact with the invisible. The dif- 
ferentiated man can only be indifferent to all of that; the problem of the 
meaning of existence is not going to be resolved in that way, because 
there one is still always within the realm of phenomena. Instead of a pro- 
found existential change, it may even cause an evasion and a greater dis- 



?,za 




The "Second Religiosity" 213 

persion, like that caused on another plane by the stupefying proliferation 
of scientific knowledge and technology. However, neospiritualism does 
occasionally envisage something more and different, even if confusedly, 
when it refers to "initiation" and when this is postulated as the goal of 
various practices, "exercises," rites, yogic techniques, and so on. 

I cannot simply condemn this out of hand, but it is necessary to 
dispel some illusions. Initiation, taken in its strict and legitimate sense, 
means a real ontological and existential change of man's state, an open- 
ing to the fact of the transcendent dimension. It would be the undeni- 
able realization, the integral and deconditioning appropriation, of the 
quality that I have considered as the basis of the human type who con- 
cerns us, the man still spiritually rooted in the world of Tradition. Thus 
the problem arises of what one should think when some neospiritualist 
current exhumes and presents "initiatic" paths and methods. 

This problem has to be circumscribed by the limits of this book, 
which is not concerned with those who leave their environment and 
concentrate all their energies on transcendence, as the ascetic or the 
saint can do in the religious realm, I am concerned rather with the 
human type who accepts living in the world and the age, despite hav- 
ing a different inner form from that of his contemporaries. This man 
knows that it is impossible, in a civilization like the present one, to 
revive the structures that in the world of Tradition gave a meaning 
to the whole of existence. But in that same world of Tradition, what 
might correspond to the idea of initiation belonged to the summit, to 
a separate domain with precise limits, to a path having an exceptional 
and exclusive character. It was not a question of the realm in which 
the general law, handed down from the heights of Tradition, shaped 
common existence within a given civilization, but of a higher plane, 
virtually released from that very law by the fact of being at its origin. 
I cannot go here into the distinctions to be made within the domain of 
initiation itself; we must just keep firmly in mind the higher and more 
essential significance that initiation has when one is placed on the 
metaphysical plane: a significance already mentioned as consisting of 
the spiritual deconditioning of the being. Those lesser forms that cor- 
respond to caste and tribal initiations, and also to the minor initiations 
linked to one or another cosmic power, as in certain cults of antiquity — 



214 The Spiritual Problem 

forms quite different, therefore, from the "great liberation" — must be 
left aside here, not least because no basis for them exists any longer in 
the modern world. 

Well then, if initiation is taken in its highest, metaphysical sense, 
one must assume a priori that it is not even a hypothetical possibility 
in an epoch like the present, in an environment like the one we live in, 
and also given the general inner formation of individuals (now feeling 
the fatal effect of a collective ancestry that for centuries has been abso- 
lutely unfavorable). Anyone who sees things differently either does not 
understand the matter, or else is deceiving himself and others. 5 What 
has to be negated most decisively is the transposition to this field of the 
individualistic and democratic view of the "self-made man," that is, the 
idea that anyone who wants can become an "initiate," and that he can 
also become one on his own, through his own strength alone, by resort- 
ing to various kinds of "exercises" and practices. This is an illusion, the 
truth being that through his own strength alone, the human individual 
cannot go beyond human individuality, and that any positive result in 
this field is conditioned by the presence and action of a genuine power 
of a different, nonindividual order. And I can say categorically that in 
this respect, the possible cases are reduced to only three. 

The first case is where one already naturally possesses this other 
power. This is the exceptional case of what was called "natural dig- 
nity," not derived from simple human birth; it is comparable to what in 
the religious domain is called election. The differentiated man posited 
here does possess a structure akin to the type to whom this first possi- 
bility refers. But for "natural dignity" in this specific, technical sense to 
be validated in him, a host of problems arise that can only be overcome 
if the trial of the self, spoken of in chapter 1, happens to be oriented in 
this direction. 

The other cases concern an "acquired dignity." The second case is 
the possibility of the power in question appearing in cases of profound 
crises, spiritual traumas, or desperate actions, with the consequence of 
a violent breakthrough of the existential and ontological plane. Here it 
is possible that if the person is not wrecked, he may be led to partici- 
pate in that force, even without his having held it consciously as a goal. 
I should clarify the situation by adding that in such cases a quantity of 




The "Second Religiosity" 215 

energy must already have been accumulated, which the circumstances 
cause to suddenly appear, with a consequent change of state. Therefore 
the circumstances appear as an occasional cause but not a determining 
cause, being necessary but not sufficient. It is like the last drop of water 
that makes the vase overflow, but only when it is already full, or the 
breaking of a dike that does not cause an inundation unless the water 
is already pressing on it. 

The third and last case concerns the grafting of the power in ques- 
tion onto the individual by virtue of the action of a representative of a 
preexistent initiatic organization who is duly qualified to do so. It is the 
equivalent of priestly ordination in the religious field, which in theory 
imprints on the person an "indelible character," qualifying him for 
the efficacious performance of the rites. The author already cited here, 
Rene Guenon — who in modern times has been almost alone in treating 
such arguments with authority and seriousness, not without denounc- 
ing, too, the deviations, errors, and mystifications of neospiritualism — 
considers this third case almost to the exclusion of the others. For my 
part, I think that in our time this case is virtually excluded in practical 
terms, because of the almost complete nonexistence of the organiza- 
tions in question. If organizations of the kind have always had a more 
or less underground character in the West, because of the nature of the 
religion that has come to predominate there, with its repressions and 
persecutions, in recent times they have virtually disappeared. As for 
other areas, especially the East, such organizations have become ever 
more rare and inaccessible, even when the forces that they control have 
not been withdrawn, in parallel with the general process of degenera- 
tion and modernization that has now invaded those areas, too. Most 
of all, today the East itself is no longer in a position to furnish most 
people with anything but by-products, in a "regime of residues." That 
much is obvious if one examines the spiritual stature of those from 
the East who have set to exporting and publicizing "Eastern wisdom" 
among us. 6 

Guenon did not see the situation in such pessimistic terms because 
of two misunderstandings. The first derived from his not only consider- 
ing initiation in the integral and actual sense, as described here, but 
introducing the concept of a "virtual initiation" that can take place 



216 The Spiritual Problem 

without any effect being perceptible by the consciousness; thus it 
remains as inoperative in concrete terms as — to take another parallel 
from the Catholic religion — the supernatural quality of being a "son of 
God" is in the vast majority of cases, though this is dispensed at bap- 
tism, even to retarded infants. Guenon's second misunderstanding 
comes from supposing that the transmission of such a force is real even 
in the case of organizations that once had an initiatic character, but 
which time has brought to a state of extreme degenerescence. There is 
good reason to suppose that the spiritual power that originally consti- 
tuted their center has withdrawn, leaving nothing behind the facade but 
a sort of psychic cadaver. 7 In neither point can I agree with Guenon, 
and so I think that today the third case is even more improbable than 
the other two. 

Referring now to the man who concerns us, if the idea of an "initia- 
tion" is to figure on his mental horizon, he should clearly recognize the 
distance between that and the climate of neospiritualism, nor should 
he have any illusions about it. The most he can conceive of as a practi- 
cal possibility is a basic orientation in terms of preparation, for which 
he will find a natural predisposition in himself. But realization has to 
be left undetermined, and it is well for him to recall the postnihilistic 
vision of life, described above, which excludes any reference point that 
might cause a deviation or decentering — even if the diversion, as in this 
case, were linked to the impatient awaiting of the moment in which he 
would finally achieve an opening. The Zen saying is again valid in this 
context: "He who seeks the Way, leaves the Way." 

A realistic view of the situation and an honest self-evaluation indi- 
cate that the only serious and essential task today is to give ever more 
emphasis to the dimension of transcendence in oneself, more or less 
concealed as it may be. Study of traditional wisdom and knowledge of 
its doctrines may assist, but they will not be effective without a pro- 
gressive change affecting the existential plane, and more particularly, 
the basic life force of oneself as a person: that force that for most peo- 
ple is bound to the world and is simply the will to live. One can com- 
pare this effect to the induction of magnetism into a piece of iron — an 
induction that also imprints on it a direction. Afterwards one can sus- 
pend the iron and move it about as one wishes, but after oscillating for 



The "Second Religiosity " 217 

a certain time and amplitude, it will always return to point toward the 
pole. When the orientation toward the transcendent no longer has a 
merely mental or emotional character, but has come to penetrate a per- 
son's being, the most essential work is done, the seed has penetrated the 
earth, and the rest is, in a way, secondary and consequential. All the 
experiences and actions that, when one lives in the world, especially in 
an epoch like ours, may have the character of a diversion and be tied to 
various contingencies, will then have the same irrelevant effect as the 
displacing of the magnetized needle, after which it resumes its direc- 
tion. Anything more that may eventually be realized, as I have said, is 
left to circumstance and to an invisible wisdom. And here the horizons 
should not be restricted to those of the individual, finite existence that 
the differentiated man finds himself living here and now. 

Thus, setting aside the far-off and overly pretentious goals of an 
absolute and actual initiation understood in metaphysical terms, even 
the differentiated man should think himself fortunate if he can actually 
succeed in producing this modification, which integrates quite natu- 
rally the partial effects of the attitudes defined for him, in many differ- 
ent domains, in the preceding pages. 




30 
Death 

The Right Over Life 



In our examination of existentialism, we encountered Heidegger's con- 
ception of existence as "living for death." He makes death a sort of 
center of gravity, because it is there that the realization of the absolute 
and final sense of existence, of "Dasein," has been displaced: some- 
thing that even recalls the religious conception of life as preparation 
for death. We have seen that all the premises of Heidegger's philoso- 
phy certainly make this outcome of existence ending in death appear 
negative — almost ecstatically negative. 

This does not prevent the idea of death from having a particular 
meaning for the differentiated man; on the contrary, in a certain way it 
can be his touchstone. Here too, it is a matter of seeing how far he has 
been invaded, even beneath the threshold of his ordinary consciousness, 
by the way of feeling that has come to be existentially determined in 
Western man in general, whether through complex processes of involu- 
tion, or through the conceptions of the dominant, theistic religion. 

Facing the idea of death, the end of the "person," his first test natu- 
rally refers to establishing in the self the incapacity for that anguish 
that, according to Heidegger, one should "have the courage to feel," 
while also discounting all those prospects of the beyond and those oth- 
erworldly judgments that popular forms of religion have used to control 
the individual by working on the subintellectual part of his soul. 

Here too, we can see that some processes of dissolution in the mod- 
ern world are virtually ambivalent. Not only have atheism and materi- 
alism contributed to banishing the terrors of the soul facing death, but 
the tragedy of death itself has often been trivialized by the collective 
catastrophic events of recent times. Today death occurs more simply 
and easily than in earlier times, and in turn diminishes the importance 

218 



r 



Death 219 

of human life, parallel to the growing insignificance and irrelevance 
that have marked the individual in the modern mechanized world of 
the masses. In addition, during the indiscriminate carpet bombings of 
the recent war, many could arrive at an attitude in which the death of 
any person, even a relative, became a natural and habitual event, having 
no more impact than the destruction of something merely material and 
external. Meanwhile, the idea of the uncertainty of life also enters into 
the order of habitual events, along with the prospect that tomorrow one 
could cease to exist. 

In most cases the result of all this is a numbing, which alone can per- 
haps explain the strange Heideggerian reaction of approving anguish in 
the face of death. But a contrary, positive result should not be excluded 
when similar experiences favor an inner calm, under the sign of that 
which remains beyond the individual and the bond of the physical I. In 
antiquity, Lucretius made a functional, pragmatic use of something like 
modern atheistic science: in order to banish the fears of the beyond, he 
maintained the Olympic idea of the divine, but recognized the gods as 
distant essences that do not intervene in the world, and should be valued 
by the wise only as ideals of ontological perfection. 

These aspects could provide a positive climate in the modern world 
for the differentiated man, because that which has been affected only 
concerns a vision of humanized life devoid of the sense of great dis- 
tances. He can then consider a particular "contemplation of death" as 
a positive factor, as a challenge, and as a measure of his inner strength. 
He can also follow the well-known ancient maxim of considering every 
day as the last of his individual existence: at the prospect, not only 
should he maintain his calm, but he should not even change anything 
in his thinking or acting. Here an example could be the kamikaze sui- 
cide pilots who had vowed to die; the prospect of being called at any 
moment to execute a mission with no return did not exclude them from 
ordinary occupations, training, and recreation, and was not at all 
weighed down by a dismal sense of tragedy, even when lasting for 
months. More generally, the idea of death is a matter of surpassing an 
inner limit, of breaking a bond. To a certain extent, it brings us back to 
what was said in the first chapter. The positive contemplatio mortis, to 
which I referred, no longer gives importance to staying alive or not, and 



220 The Spiritual Problem 

leaves death behind one, so to speak, without being paralyzed by it. On 
the contrary: from this point one should enter into a higher, exalted, 
free form of living, carried by a sort of magical, lucid intoxication. 

There is one factor that positively undramatizes the idea of death: 
it is that mentioned when speaking of the traditional doctrine of pre- 
existence. The differentiated man cannot think that his being begins 
with his physical, corporeal birth, and ends with his death. However, 
he can neither make the beyond the center of gravity of his life, as in the 
religious theory of salvation, nor can he regard terrestrial existence as 
the mere ascetic preparation for death. We have seen that he solves the 
problem of the meaning of life in the epoch of nihilism by displacing the 
I toward the dimension of "being." In the preceding paragraph I spoke 
of the attitude consistent with this displacement, which should existen- 
tially pervade the person, just as magnetism permeates a metal. Even if 
in many cases the force produced from this attitude can only act sensibly 
beyond this existence, it should still be able to assure a calm and secure 
life. An Eastern saying puts it as follows: "Life on earth is a journey in 
the night hours." One can explain its positive content by referring to the 
sensation of a "before" (with respect to human existence) and "after" 
(with respect to the same). In metaphysical terms, birth is a change of 
state and so is death; the human condition of earthly existence is only 
a restricted section in a continuum, in a current that traverses many 
other states* 

In general, but particularly in a chaotic epoch in dissolution like the 
present one, it can be difficult to grasp the sense of this apparition of 
the being that one is, in the guise of a certain person, who lives in a 
given time and in a given place, who goes through these experiences, of 
whom this will be the end: it is like the confused sensation of a region 
traversed in a night journey where only a few scattered lights reveal 
some glimpses of the landscape. Nevertheless, one should maintain the 
sentiment, or presentiment, of one who when getting on a train knows 
he will get off it, and that when he gets off he will also see the entire 
course traveled, and will go further. This sentiment favors an immanent 
firmness and security, distinctly different from the state that arises in the 
soul facing death within the framework of a creationist theistic religion, 
in which whatever part of the being is superior and anterior to life, thus 






DMtA 221 

also metaphysically surviving the death that ends it, remains effectively 
hidden. 

However, any change of state involves a crisis; only the traditional 
view mentioned earlier can completely eliminate the problematic nature 
of the beyond and the event of death itself. Here, again, we would have 
to examine teachings that fall outside the scope of this book. I will 
limit myself to showing that the valid attitude toward the beyond is the 
same attitude that I proposed for life in general: that of a transcendental 
confidence, joined on one side by the "heroic" and "sacrificial" disposi- 
tion (readiness to actively take oneself beyond oneself), on the other by 
one's capacity to dominate his soul, impulses, and imagination: just as 
one who, in a difficult and risky situation does not lose control of him- 
self, doing lucidly and without hesitation all that can be done. Through 
this, one should benefit from all the recommendations in the preceding 
pages, recommendations that can then be as valid beyond life as they 
are for life in the current epoch. Last but not least, they include the 
disposition of being ready "to bear lethal blows on one's own being 
without being destroyed." 

At this point, we shall briefly turn our attention to a particular prob- 
lem, the right over one's own life, understood as the freedom to accept it 
or to put an end to it voluntarily. The examination of this issue will also 
allow a further clarification of some points considered earlier. 

Suicide, condemned by most moralities with social and religious 
foundations, has in fact been permitted by two doctrines whose norms 
of life are not far from those indicated for the differentiated man in the 
present epoch: Stoicism and Buddhism. One can refer to the ideas of 
Seneca regarding Stoicism, recalling above all the general background 
of its vision of life. I have already said that for Seneca the true man 
would be above the gods themselves because they, by their very nature, 
do not know adversity and misfortune, whereas he is exposed to them, 
but has the power to triumph over them. Moreover, Seneca sees the 
beings that are most harshly tested as the worthiest, recalling this 
analogy: in war it is the most capable, sure, and qualified persons that 
leaders entrust with the most exposed positions and the hardest tasks. 
Usually it is this virile and agonistic conception that applies when sui- 
cide is condemned and stigmatized as cowardice and desertion. (There 



222 The Spiritual Problem 

is a saying attributed by Cicero to the Pythagoreans: "To leave the place 
that one is assigned in life is not permitted without an order from the 
leader, who is God.") Instead Seneca reached the opposite conclusion, 
and put the justification of suicide directly into the mouth of divinity 
(De Providentia^ 6*7-9). He makes the divinity say that he has given the 
superior man, the sage, not only a force stronger than any contingency, 
and something more than being exempt from evils, namely the power to 
triumph over them interiorly, but has also ensured that no one can hold 
him back against his will: the path to "exit" is open to him — patet exi- 
tus, "Wherever you do not want to fight, it is always possible to retreat* 
You have been given nothing easier than death." 

Given the presuppositions mentioned earlier with regard to the gen- 
eral vision of life, there is no doubt that Seneca did not intend this deci- 
sion to refer to cases in which death is sought because a given situation 
appears unbearable: especially then, one could not permit oneself the 
act. Here too it is unnecessary to add what is equally valid for all those 
who are driven to cut their life short due to emotional and impassioned 
motives, because this would be equivalent to recognizing one's own 
passivity and impotence toward the irrational part of one's soul. The 
same is even true for cases in which social motives intervene. Both the 
ideal Stoic type and the differentiated man do not permit these motives 
to intimately touch them, as if their dignity were injured by what binds 
them to social life. They would never be driven to put an end to their 
own existence for these motives, which are included by the Stoics in 
the category of "that which does not depend on me." The only excep- 
tion we can consider is the case of a disgrace not before others whose 
judgment and contempt one cannot bear, but before oneself, because 
of one's own downfall. Considering all this, Seneca's maxim can only 
have the meaning of an enhancement of the inner freedom of a superior 
being. It is not a matter of retreating because one does not feel strong 
enough before such ordeals and circumstances; rather, it is a matter of 
the sovereign right — that one always keeps in reserve — to either accept 
these ordeals or not, and even to draw the line when one no longer sees 
a meaning in them, and after having sufficiently demonstrated to one- 
self the capacity to face them. Impassibility is taken for granted, and the 
right to "exit" is justifiable as one of the possibilities to be considered, 



<&;- 




Death 223 

in principle, only for the sake of decreeing that our circumstances have 
our assent, that we are really active in them, and that we are not just 
making a virtue of necessity. This Stoic point of view is intelligible and, 
what is more, unassailable. 

We turn now to Buddhism, whose orientation is more or less the 
same. Also there the most frequent kind of suicide is forbidden: when- 
ever one is driven to renounce life in the name of life itself, that is, 
because some form of a will to live, enjoy, and be worthwhile has been 
hindered or thwarted, killing oneself is censured. In fact, in these cases 
the act is not judged as a freeing of oneself but, on the contrary, as the 
extreme, even negative, form of attachment to life, of dependence on 
life. No transfiguring beyond can be expected by one who uses such 
violence on himself; in other states of being, the law of an existence 
devoid of peace, stability, and light is once again asserted over him. 
Buddhism even goes as far as condemning as a deviation the impulse 
toward extinction, nirvana, if one discovers that it is connected to any 
desire, any "thirst." At the same time, like Stoicism, it permits suicide 
with a similar restriction: it does not apply to the commonality, but to 
a superior and ascetic type in whom are found, intensified, many traits 
of the Stoic sage; those who in a certain way have realized a separa- 
tion of the Self, to the extent of being virtually beyond both living and 
nonliving. 

Though obviously this prospect can also be included in the horizon 
of the differentiated man, it leaves the path open for some difficulties. 
First of all, if he has reached the spiritual level just indicated, what 
could ever make him initiate a voluntary death? Judging from certain 
concrete cases alleged by Buddhist texts, some of the cases mentioned 
earlier would seem to be in question: in some circumstances there is no 
reason to feel committed beyond a certain limit. One can then "exit/' 
almost as when one has had enough of a game, or as when one shoos 
a fly away after having let it settle for a time on one's face. It remains 
to be seen how far one can be truly sure of oneself, and sincere with 
oneself, in cases of this kind. 

Up to this point, it is the "person" that we have essentially consid- 
ered. The issue becomes more complex when going beyond the level of 
the person and referring to the traditional doctrine in which the being 



224 The Spiritual Problem 

does not begin with earthly existence. Then a higher concept of respon- 
sibility, and also of risk, shows itself. It is not the responsibility called 
upon in the framework of a theistic and creationist religion, which con- 
demns suicide by appealing to a kind of military loyalty as in Cicero's 
terms: one should not abandon his post. Such an idea appears absurd 
when the preexistence of the soul is denied (as that religion denies it) 
before its union with the body in the human condition. In this "cre- 
ationist" hypothesis one cannot sensibly speak of responsibility, because 
before being in the assigned "post" one did not exist at all, and because 
one suddenly finds oneself in it without having wanted or accepted it. 
Nor can one speak of a "military obligation" toward a life received, 
but not requested. I have already examined the dead end to which such 
a conception, connected to the theistic creationist point of view, leads 
when it is assailed by nihilism. The extreme here is in Dostoyevsky, with 
Kirilov's existential revolt and "metaphysical suicide" in which he takes 
his own life only to prove to himself that he is stronger than fear, his 
sovereignty, and an absolute freedom that makes him God. This posi- 
tion is absurd because here, no less than in theism, the only point of 
reference always appears to be the person; it is from the person that the 
initiative arises, it is the person that wants to make itself absolute. For a 
similar case, Augustine's words could even be valid: "Slave, you wanted 
to simulate a mutilated freedom by doing the illicit with impunity, in a 
blind imitation of omnipotence." 1 As we have seen, this is also the rea- 
son why Raskolnikov and Stavrogin fell, the latter's suicide correspond- 
ing to that type that is imposed by one's own failure — though, from an 
entirely different standpoint, it could be justified in a given human type 
under special circumstances, as touched on earlier. 

But the problem of responsibility is seen under a different light 
when one refers to the traditional doctrine that we saw to have been 
more or less confusedly shadowed by existentialism itself: if one holds 
on to the idea that whatever one is as a person in the human condition 
proceeds from an original, prenatal, and pretemporal choice, wherein 
one willed, in terms of an "original project" (as Sartre calls it), every- 
thing that would define the contents of one's existence. In this case, it is 
no longer a matter of answering to a Creator, but to something refer- 
ring to the very dimension of being or transcendence in oneself. The 



Death 225 

course of existence, though not attributable to the more exterior and 
already human will of the individual (the person), follows, in principle, 
a line that has significance for the I, even though still latent or con- 
cealed: as an entirety of experiences important not in themselves but for 
the reactions that they provoke in us, reactions through which that 
being that one wished to be can be realized. In that case, life in this 
world cannot be considered as something that one can arbitrarily throw 
away, nor can it be considered simply as a bad situation in which the 
only choice is faith or fatalistic resignation (we have seen that, at best, 
the horizons of modern existentialism end there), or else being locked 
into a continuous trial of resistance (as happens along the lines of a 
dark Stoicism, devoid of the background of transcendence). As in an 
adventure, a mission, a trial, an election, or an experiment, earthly life 
appears to be something to which one committed oneself before finding 
oneself in the human condition, accepting in anticipation whatever dif- 
ficult, miserable, or dramatic aspects it might bring, aspects that are 
especially likely in an epoch like the present. In these terms we can 
define and accept a principle of responsibility and "loyalty," without 
external, "heteronomous" references. 

I have already spoken of the only presuppositions that, according 
to Stoicism and Buddhism, would permit the act of suicide: a superi- 
ority, a detachment from life. It is, however, difficult to realize them 
without meanwhile achieving, in some way, a suprapersonal meaning 
of existence on earth in the terms just mentioned: there being added 
the sensation that the whole of this existence is only an episode, a pas- 
sage, as in the image of the voyage at night. Then would not feeling in 
oneself any impatience, any intolerance, or even any tediousness testify 
to the presence of a too human residue, of something not yet resolved 
by the sense of eternity or, at least, by great unearthly and nontem- 
poral distances? And if it were so, would one not be obliged, facing 
oneself, not to act? 

An Islamic saying, appropriate for a rigorous doctrine of predesti- 
nation, is true: "No one can die unless by the will of Allah and at the 
moment fixed by Him." Similarly, if one assumes the predetermination 
of the essential course of individual existence, even suicide could be 
thought of as one of the particular acts already contemplated, so that it 



«?- 




226 The Spiritual Problem 

only appears to be an arbitrary initiative of the person. However, this 
is an extreme assumption, and in reality the decision could only be illu- 
minated by the degree of effective integration that has been attained, 
in terms already mentioned, as the welding of the person with Being. It 
is certain that in an integration of this kind, even if incomplete, suicide 
could have the meaning of an extreme gesture that seals one's sover- 
eignty, in terms quite different from those of Kirilov: the sovereignty 
would not be of the person, but over the person. All that would remain 
would be the responsibility inherent in affirming that what acts is pre- 
cisely the principle that is not the person, but possesses the person. 
However, recourse to this action can rarely present a positive and intel- 
ligible character for the differentiated man. Everyone knows that sooner 
or later the end will come, so that when facing every contingency it is 
more valuable to try to decipher the hidden meaning, the part that it has 
in a context that, according to the view mentioned earlier, is not alien 
to us, but proceeds from our transcendental will 

Matters are obviously different when one does not directly seek 
death but includes it, so to speak, in life, considering situations in 
which death coincides with obtaining the utmost meaning from life 
in the human condition. Here, unlike what Heidegger described, it is 
not a matter of a presumed gravitation of the "Dasein" of any finite 
existence — having its own principle outside itself — toward death and 
as if from one's dependence on it. The presupposition is instead a spe- 
cial and uncommon orientation that can be given to one's own life. In 
place of violent and direct action over one's life, one can "interrogate" 
it through forms of intense and risky existence. There are ways to put 
an ever more peremptory and insistent question to "destiny" (we intend 
this term as when speaking of amor fati and the special confidence in 
always following one's own way, in any event or contingency) in order 
to obtain the response as to how far there is still a profound, impersonal 
reason for existing in the human condition. And if this questioning 
leads to situations in which the borderline between life and death also 
represents the extreme limit of the sense and fullness of a life — differ- 
ently from what would come from exaltation, simple intoxication, or 
a confused, ecstatic effort — then one would certainly reach the most 
satisfying condition for existentially overcoming the problem faced by 



Death 227 

us* The formula referred to in context of a change of polarity of living, 
of particular intensities of living as a means toward a more-than-living, 
evidently finds its supreme application on this path. In particular, here 
one can see a connection with the special orientations considered in this 
chapter: measuring oneself in a contemplation of death, living every 
day in the present as if it were the last, and the quasi-magnetic orienta- 
tion to be induced in one's own being, which may not manifest in this 
existence with the complete rupture of the ontological level proper to 
"initiation," but will not fail to emerge at the right moment, in order to 
carry one beyond. 

One will see, therefore, that dwelling on this problem of death and 
the right over life, as the last problem of all we have examined, is of the 
greatest advantage regarding the attitude and behavior of the differenti- 
ated and unbroken man in an epoch of dissolution. 

Elevating oneself above that which can be understood in the light of 
human reason alone; reaching a high interior level and an invulnerabil- 
ity otherwise hard to attain: these are perhaps among the possibilities 
that, through adequate reactions, are offered in the cases in which the 
night journey allows almost nothing to be perceived of the landscape 
that one traverses, and in which the theory of Geworfenheit^ of being 
absurdly "flung" into the world and time, seems to be true, especially 
in a climate in which physical existence itself must present a growing 
insecurity. If one can allow one's mind to dwell on a bold hypothesis — 
which could also be an act of faith in a higher sense — once the idea of 
Geworfenbeit is rejected, once it is conceived that living here and now 
in this world has a sense, because it is always the effect of a choice and 
a will, one might even believe that one's own realization of the pos- 
sibilities I have indicated — far more concealed and less imaginable in 
other situations that might be more desirable from the merely human 
point of view, from the point of view of the "person" — is the ultimate 
rationale and significance of a choice made by a "being" that wanted 
to measure itself against a difficult challenge: that of living in a world 
contrary to that consistent with its nature, that is, contrary to the world 
of Tradition. 

Anyone who wants to comprehend the essence of the chivalric romances and 
epics to which the cycle of the Grail belongs (together with many other analo- 
gous and related writings) must overcome a series of prejudices, the first of 
which is what I call the literary prejudice. 

I am referring to the bias displayed by those who regard romances and legends 
merely as fantastic and poetic human works, whether of an individual or collec- 
tive authorship; these people deny anything that may have a higher, symbolic 
value and that cannot be regarded as an arbitrary creation. It is precisely this 
symbolic, objective, and superindividual element, however, that constitutes the 
core of sagas, legends, myths, adventurous feats, and epics of the traditional 
world. 1 This element did not always originate from a perfectly conscious inten- 
tion. Especially in the case of semicollective works, the most important and 
meaningful elements have often been expressed almost unconsciously by their 
authors, who did not realize they were obeying some external influences; these 
influences at a certain point employed the direct intentions or the creative spon- 
taneity of certain personalities or groups as means to an end. 

Thus, even in cases in which spontaneous, poetic, or fantastic compositions 
appear to be in the forefront, such elements nonetheless have the value of a con- 
tingent covering and vehicle of expression, at which only a superficial reader 
may stop. Some authors intended simply to engage in artistic compositions 



1. In order to understand the specific meaning that I have given to the expression "traditional 
world," I refer my readers to two other works of mine, Revolt Against the Modern World, trans. 
Guido Stucco (Rochester* Vt.; Inner Traditions, 1995), and The Mask and True Face of Contempor- 
ary Spirituality. The same meaning has been given to it by R. Guenon and his group. 



APPROACHING THE MYSTERY OF THE GRAIL 



and were indeed successful at that, so much so that their productions are en- 
joyed by those who know about and care for the aesthetic perspective only. This 
does not mean that these people, in their "artistic productions' 5 and in their 
spontaneity, have not also done something else; they have either preserved and 
transmitted or activated a higher content, which a trained eye will always be 
able to recognize. Some authors would undoubtedly be shocked if they were 
clearly shown that this is indeed what has happened in their works. 

In the legendary traditional compositions, however, the authors usually 
were not aware of engaging in something that goes beyond mere art and fan- 
tasy, even though they almost always had only a confused sensation of the 
scope of the themes that they put at the center of their creations. A concept 
from the domain of individual psychology has been extended to the domain of 
sagas and of legends, namely, that of a peripheral consciousness and, beneath 
it, an area of subtler, deeper, and more important influences. From a psycho- 
analytic perspective, dreams are among those states in which such influences, 
which have been repressed or excluded from waking consciousness, take direct 
control of the power of imagination, translating themselves into symbolic im- 
ages. Ordinary consciousness experiences these images without understanding 
their real content. The more these images or phantasms appear to be extrava- 
gant or incoherent, the more we must suspect the existence of a latent, intelli- 
gent, and meaningful content 

This is what should be thought in many cases about sagas, legends, adven- 
tures, myths, and even fairy tales. And so it often happens that the most fan- 
tastic, strange, improbable and incoherent aspect, which is less likely to have an 
aesthetic or historical value and therefore is usually set aside, eventually offers 
the best way to understand the central element that bestows upon such com- 
positions its true sense and at times even its higher historical meaning. 
According to a saying in a particular tradition, which later on I will show to be 
related to that of the Grail: "Where I have spoken more clearly and openly 
about our science, there I have spoken obscurely and mysteriously." The 
Roman emperor Julian wrote: "When myths on sacred subjects are incongru- 
ous in thought, by that very fact they cry aloud, as it were, and summon us not 
to believe them literally, but to study and track down their hidden meaning." 2 

This, then, is the first prejudice that needs to be overcome. This prejudice 
influences the interpretation of the medieval romances and especially the liter- 
ature of the Love's Lieges (Fedeli D'Amore). In this type of literature, owing to 
the preponderance of the artistic and poetic element, which was used as a cov- 



2. Julian, Against the Cynic Heracleios, 217c. 



The Literary Prejudice 



ering, many people have regarded as iconoclast any attempt to set forth an 
extraliterary exegesis, namely, any attempt to penetrate the mystery found 
within this poetic literature. Such an attempt is related not only to the influ- 
ences that have generated the Grail cycle but also to certain organizations that 
have acted in history "behind the scenes" 



2 



The Ethnological Prejudice 



A second prejudice that has to be overcome is the ethnological one. This prej- 
udice essentially concerns an order of researches that have begun to unearth 
many hidden roots of the cycle of legends to which the Grail belongs. These 
studies have not been able to recognize in these legends anything other than 
fragments of folklore and of ancient, primitive, popular beliefs. It is important 
to make a clarification in regard to this subject, because the presence of such 
elements in the Grail tradition is real. Moreover, they constitute the guiding 
thread that reconnects the historical aspect, which is relative to the presence 
and to the effectiveness of a particular Jradition, to the suprahistorical and ini- 
tiatory aspect of the legend of the Grail. 

First of all, it is necessary to extend to the collective dimension the relativ- 
ity of the "creative" aspect that I have previously discussed in relation to indi- 
vidual productions, since most people see in folklore a spontaneous popular 
production, or a fantastic collective product, that is mixed with superstitions 
and needs to be considered for all practical purposes as an oddity. Influenced 
by such a prejudice, the so-called ethnological schools, just like the psycho- 
analytical trends devoted to the study of the "collective unconscious " have en- 
gaged in various researches that always amount to a systematic, contaminating 
reduction of what is higher and superior to what is lower and inferior. 

At this point I must dispute the very notion of "primitiveness" that is at- 
tributed today to some popular traditions. Far from being "primitive" (i.e., pri- 
mordial), in most cases such traditions are nothing but degenerated residues 
that must be reconnected to very ancient cycles of civilization. Thus I concur 
with Rene Guenon's assessment that so-called folklore, 



\ 



The Ethnological Prejudice 



in almost every instance, contains traditional elements in the true sense of 
the word, although at times they are deformed, diminished, or fragmen- 
tary. These elements have a real, symbolic value and thus, far from origi- 
nating in people's minds, do not even have a human origin; the only 
popular thing is merely the fact that they have "survived " considering that 
these elements belong to traditional forms that by now have disappeared. 
These extinct traditional forms sometimes are to be traced to such a 
distant past that it would be impossible to determine it, a past that is there- 
fore confined to the obscure domain of prehistory. In this regard, people 
act as some sort of more or less unconscious collective memory, the con- 
tent of which is derived from some other source. 1 

Likewise, I agree with Guenon's explanation concerning the peculiar fact 
that people in these cases are the bearers of many elements belonging to a 
higher plane, such as the initiatory one, and therefore to a plane that is in 
essence "unpopular": 

When a traditional form is about to become extinct, its last representatives 
can willingly entrust to that collective memory what would otherwise be 
lost. This, in other words, is the only way to salvage what can still be sal- 
vaged. At the same time, the natural lack of understanding of the masses 
is a sufficient guarantee that what had an esoteric character may not be 
lost, but that it rather may continue to exist as a sort of witness of the past 
to those who in a later epoch will be able to comprehend it. 2 



This last observation is especially true in the case of the elements of the al- 
legedly "pagan" Nordic-Western folklore that are present in the legends of the 
Grail and King Arthur. These elements, once properly integrated (i.e., brought 
back to their original symbolic meaning through traditional and even inter- 
traditional references), will convey the true meaning that certain romances and 
epics incorporated. These romances were highly regarded in the medieval 
knightly world and also had a relationship with the Ghibelline ideal of the im- 
perium and with various secret traditions and groups that inherited, in various 
forms, the spiritual legacy of this ideal. 

Thus we can clearly see the difference between this perspective and the 
above-mentioned psychoanalytical theories concerning the subconscious or 
collective unconscious, in which the latter has become a sort of grab bag 



1. R. Gu£non,"Le Saint Grail," Le Voile d'Isis (1934): 47-48. 

2. Ibid. 



APPROACHING THE MYSTERY OF THE GRAIL 



containing all kinds of things, all of which are considered, more or less, in 
terms of "life," "atavism " and the "irrational." What such theories regard uni- 
formly as the "unconscious" should rather be considered the superconscious- 
ness. It is simply ridiculous to regard myths and symbols as manifestations or 
archetypes of "life," considering that their nature is essentially metaphysical 
and that they have nothing to do with "life " unless we are talking about their 
empty shells. It is pointless to remark, as C. G. Jung and Richard Wilhelm have 
done, 3 that any positive consideration must be limited to the study of the man- 
ifestations of the "unconscious" understood as pure experiences, without any 
reference to transcendent elements. 

The truth is that when there are no firm reference points, there is no hope 
of orienting oneself through various experiences, of understanding and evalu- 
ating them, especially when experience as a whole is abusively identified with 
some of its particular modalities, which at times are even affected by patholog- 
ical factors. This has been abundantly demonstrated by the outcome of all the 
various psychoanalytical interpretations. These attempts fail to reach the plane 
of the spirit. Moreover, even when they do not lead to a subnormal world of 
neuropaths and hysterics by producing such aberrations as those found in 
Sigmund Freud's Totem and Taboo, they nevertheless produce (as in the case of 
Jung's theory of "archetypes") confused perceptions that are greatly influenced 
by the new superstitious cult of what is "vital" and "irrational," thereby prov- 
ing not so much to lack assumptions as to have mistaken ones. 



3. Jung's and Wilhelm's introduction to The Secret of the Golden Flower, trans. R. Wilhelm (New 
York: Harcourt, 1962). 



8 



3 



Concerning the 
Traditional Method 



What still needs to be overcome is the tendency to derive the fundamental 
themes of the Grail and of the imperial myth solely from a particular histori- 
cal movement, by supposing an external, casual, and empirical transmission. 
According to a widespread opinion, the Grail is essentially a Christian legend. 
Some have instead hypothesized a Celtic-pagan origin; 1 others favor an Indo- 
Chinese origin; 2 still others argue for a Syrian origin; 3 and some have made ref- 
erences to alchemy 4 On another plane, not only has the Grail been associated 
with the doctrines of the Cathars and the ancient Persians, but some have even 
attempted to identify characters and historical locations described in the leg- 
end (France, according to some, Iran, according to others). 

No matter how legitimate these comparisons may be, what is significant is 
the spirit in which they are drawn. The characteristic feature of the method 
that I call "traditional" (in opposition to the profane, empirical, and critical-in- 
tellectual method of modern research), consists in emphasizing the universal 
character of a symbol or teaching, and in relating it to corresponding symbols 
found in other traditions, thus establishing the presence of something that 
is both superior and antecedent to each of these formulations, which are 



1. A. Nutt, Studies on the Legend of the Holy Grail (London, 1888), Also, J, Marx, La Legende arthuri- 
enne et le Graal (Paris, 1952). 

2. L von Schroeder, Die Wurzel der Sage vom beiligen Gral (Vienna, 1910). 

3. L. E. Iselin> Der morgenlandische Ursprungder Grallegende (Halle, 1909). 

4. R. Palgen, Der Stein der Weisen (Breslau, 1922). 



APPROACHING THE MYSTERY OF THE GRAIL 



different from and yet equivalent to each other. Since any one tradition may 
have given to a common meaning a more complete, typical, and transparent 
expression than have the others, seeking to establish correspondences is conse- 
quently one of the most fruitful ways to understand and integrate what in other 
cases is found in a more obscure or fragmentary form. 

Although this is the method I intend to follow, it is not the one favored by 
most modern scholars. First of all, these scholars establish not true correspon- 
dences but opaque derivations. In other words, they investigate the empirical 
and always uncertain circumstance of the material transmission of certain 
ideas or legends from one people to another, or from one literature to another, 
thus ignoring that wherever we find at work influences characteristic of a plane 
deeper than that of a merely individual conscience, a correspondence and a 
transmission may take place also through nonordinary ways, that is, without 
specific temporal and spatial conditions and without external historical con- 
tacts. Second and foremost, every comparison in such modern research ends 
up becoming a shifting rather than a widening of perspective. For instance, 
when a scholar discovers the correspondence of some themes of the legend of 
the Grail with other themes found, say, in the Persian tradition, this is regarded 
by him as a "research into the original sources"; the end result is that he will 
proudly announce to the world, "The Grail is a Persian symbol!" The new ref- 
erence does not help him to clarify one tradition through another or to under- 
stand one tradition through the universal, metaphysical, and suprahistorical 
element that may be more visible in a corresponding symbol formulated in an- 
other tradition. In other words, this amounts to a random shift of perspective 
in a two-dimensional model. It is not research into that vantage point that, 
more than others, may help to lead one from the two superficial dimensions to 
the third dimension, namely, depth, which may act as a conduit or as an or- 
dering center for all the other data. 

At this point I wish to make a further clarification concerning attempts to 
interpret the Grail in terms of historical figures and situations, considering that 
such attempts have also been made in other legends that have important con- 
nections with the Grail (e.g., those of King Arthur and Prester John). 

Generally speaking, in these attempts we detect the so-called euhemeristic 
tendency, which has been taken up by modern scholars because of their irre- 
sistible impulse to reduce the superior to the inferior whenever possible. 
According to modern scholars, the figures found in myths and legends are 
merely abstract sublimations of historical figures, which have eventually re- 
placed the latter and become myths and fantastic tales. On the contrary, the op- 
posite is true: there are realities of a superior, archetypal order, which are 
shadowed in various ways by symbols and myths. It may happen that in the 



10 



Concerning the Traditional Method 



course of history, certain structures or personalities will embody these realities. 
When this happens, history and superhistory intersect and integrate each 
other; human fantasy may then instinctively attribute the traits of myth to 
those characters and structures because reality has somehow become symbolic 
and symbol has become reality. In these cases, the euhemeristic interpretation 
totally subverts the true relationships. Here myth constitutes the primary ele- 
ment and should be regarded as the starting point, while the historical figure 
or datum is only one of the various contingent and conditioned expressions of 
this superior order of things. 

Elsewhere I have indicated the true sense of the apparently absurd and ar- 
bitrary relationships that certain legends have established between different 
historical figures. These relationships were established even though these fig- 
ures, while lacking any historical common factor in space and time, were ob- 
scurely perceived to be equivalent manifestations of a single principle or 
function. The reason behind some genealogies, which are apparently not any 
less extravagant, is also analogous: a legendary lineage expresses figuratively a 
spiritual continuity, which may be real even without a biological continuity in 
space and time. The genealogies of the kings of the Grail, Lohengrin, Arthur, 
Prester John, Helias, and others should be regarded essentially in this fashion. 
Moreover, it is precisely such ideal situations, which proceed from the above- 
mentioned interaction between history and superhistory, that give us the fun- 
damental key to understand the genesis and the meaning of the legend of the 
Grail and of those elements in it that lead back not only to the suprahistorical 
idea of the Empire but also to one of its particular manifestations in the 
Western medieval world. 



11 



4 



The Historical Context of 
the Mystery of the Grail 



When we isolate the texts that make up the Grail cycle, we find that they repeat 
a few essential themes, which are expressed through the symbolism of knightly 
figures and deeds. What we are dealing with, then, are essentially the themes of 
a mysterious center; of a quest and a spiritual test; of a regal succession or 
restoration, which sometimes assumes the character of a healing or avenging 
action. Percival, Gawain, Galahad, Ogier, Lancelot, and Peredur are essentially 
various names portraying the same hunjan type; likewise, King Arthur, Joseph 
of Arimathea, Pr ester John, and the Fisher King are equivalent figures and vari- 
ations on another theme. Also equivalent are images of various mysterious cas- 
tles, islands, kingdoms, and inaccessible and adventurous lands, which in the 
narratives are described in a series that, on the one hand, creates a strange, sur- 
realistic atmosphere but, on the other, often ends up becoming monotonous. 

I have already mentioned that all this has or is susceptible of having the 
character of a "mystery" in the initiatory sense of the word. But in the specific 
form in which all this is expressed in the Grail cycle, we must recognize the 
point at which a suprahistorical reality imposed itself on history, closely asso- 
ciating the symbols of that mystery to the confused yet lively sensation that its 
effective realization required to solve the spiritual and temporal crisis of an en- 
tire epoch, namely, the medieval ecumenical-imperial age. 

The Grail cycle originated from this very specific situation. The evocation of 
primordial and suprahistorical motifs intersected the ascent of a historical tra- 
dition at a point of equilibrium, around which a subject of varied nature and 



12 



The Historical Context of the Mystery of the Grail 



origin precipitated and was crystallized, unified by its susceptibility to the ex- 
pression of a common motif. Thus we must start from the idea of a funda- 
mental, inner unity of the various texts, and of the various figures, symbols, 
and adventures proper to them, and proceed to discover the latent capability of 
a text to integrate and continue another, until a thorough exposition of some 
fundamental themes is achieved. To bring back such motifs to their universal, 
inter traditional meaning and to an overall metaphysics of history would be a 
repetition of what I have tried to do in another work of mine; 1 here I must limit 
myself to articulating the reference points that are most crucial to our com- 
prehension of the simultaneously historical and suprahistorical meaning of the 
mystery of the Grail. 



1. See my Revolt Against the Modern World. 



13 



Part Two 



Principles and 
Prior Events 



5 



The Olympian Cycle 



According to the way of thinking I have espoused, that which was manifested 
in various people as an authentic tradition is not something relative, deter- 
mined by external or merely historical events. Rather, it always points to ele- 
ments of a knowledge that is unique in its essence. These elements always have 
the character of constants. 

Traditional teaching, though in various forms, had always and everywhere 
upheld the belief in the existence of a primordial race that embodied a tran- 
scendent spirituality; for that reason, this race was often regarded as divine or 
"like the gods." I have defined its structure as Olympian; by this term I mean to 
signify an innate superiority or a nature that is essentially supernature. A force 
from above is found in this race as a presence, predestining it to command, to 
the royal function; it shows it to be the race of "those who are" and "those who 
can" and sometimes to be a solar race. 

Belief in a Golden Age, which is found in many traditions, is a distant mem- 
ory of that race. Later peoples also formulated a suprahistorical view of that 
race's function and seat, or place of origin; this occurred because at one point, 
that which had been manifest became hidden. Owing to a progressive involu- 
tion of mankind, which was likewise recorded in several traditions, the func- 
tion exercised by this race became gradually invisible, and that direct contact 
between historical and suprahistorical elements was interrupted. This is the 
meaning, for instance, of Hesiod's teachings, according to which the beings 
of the primordial age never died but rather took an invisible form to guide 
mortal beings. 1 Thus, a shift occurred from the theme of the Golden Age to a 



1. Hesiod, Opera et dies [Works and Days], trans. T. A. Sinclair (New York: Orno Press, 1979), 1 12-125. 



17 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



metaphysical kingdom, to which all the dominators "from above" are related in 
a mysterious, objective, and ontologkal way; this is the case both with the real 
heirs of the primordial tradition and with those who reproduced more or less 
perfectly and consciously the primordial type of regnum in a given land and 
civilization. This is how the traditional notion of an invisible "King of Kings" 
or "Universal Ruler" or "King of the World," came to be associated with specific 
symbols, some of which derive directly from analogies, while others are 
mythologized memories of the land or lands where the primordial Olympian 
cycle unfolded. 

These are first and foremost symbols of centrality; the center, the pole, the 
region in the middle of the earth, the central stone or the foundation, the mag- 
net. Then, symbols of stability: the island surrounded by the waters, the rock, 
the unshakable stone. Finally, symbols of inviolability and inaccessibility; the in- 
visible or not-to-be-found castle or land, a wild mountain peak, a subterranean 
region. Moreover, the "Land of Light," the "Land of the Living," the "Holy 
Land " Yet again, all the variations of the golden symbolism, which, on the one 
hand, includes all the notions of solarity, light, regality, immortality, and in- 
corruptibility while, on the other hand, it has always had some relationship 
with the primordial tradition and with the age characterized by gold. Other 
symbols point to "life** in the higher sense of the word (e.g., the "perennial 
food," the "Tree of Life"), to a transcendent knowledge, to an invincible power; 
everything appears variously mixed in the fantastic, symbolic, or poetic repre- 
sentations that in the various traditions have foreshadowed this constant 
theme of the invisible regnum and of the Supreme Center of the world, in itself 
or in its emanations and reproductions i 



2. On this subject matter see Rene" Guenons he Roi du monde (Paris, 1927) to which I will often 

refer in the course of this book. 



18 



6 

On the "Hero" and 
the "Woman" 



As everybody knows, the doctrine of the Golden Age is part of the doctrine of 
the four ages, which testifies to the progressive spiritual involution unfolding 
in the course of history since very ancient times. All of these ages also have a 
morphological meaning and express a typical and universal form of civiliza- 
tion. Following the Golden Age, we encounter the Silver Age, which corre- 
sponds to a priestly and feminine rather than regal and virile type of 
spirituality: I have called it lunar spirituality, since the symbols of gold and sil- 
ver have traditionally been in the same relationship as that between sun and 
moon. In this context, such correspondence is particularly revealing: the moon 
is the feminine star that, unlike the sun, no longer has in itself the principle of 
its own light. Hence the shift to a spirituality conditioned by mediation, 
namely, an extrovert spirituality characterized by an attitude of submission, of 
abandonment, of loving or ecstatic rapture. Here we find the root of the "reli- 
gious" phenomenon, from its theistic-devotional forms to its mystical ones. 

Any insurgence of a wild and materialized virility against such spiritual 
forms characterizes the Bronze Age. This age is characterized by the degrada- 
tion of the warriors' caste and by its revolt against him who represents the 
spirit, insofar as he is no longer the Olympian leader but only a priest. The 
Bronze Age is also marked by the unleashing of the principle proper to the war- 
riors' caste, namely, pride, violence, war. The corresponding myth is the Titanic 
or Luciferian revolt, or the Promethean attempt to steal the Olympian fire. The 
age of "giants," or of the Wolf, or of the "elemental beings," is an equivalent 



19 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



figuration found in various traditions and in their fragments preserved in leg- 
ends and epics of various peoples. 

The last age is the Iron Age, or, according to the corresponding Hindu term, 
the Dark Age (Kali Yuga). This age includes every deconsecrated civilization, 
every civilization that knows and extols only what is human and earthly. 
Against these forms of decadence there emerged the idea of a possible cycle of 
restoration, which Hesiod called the heroic cycle or age of heroes. Here we must 
employ the term heroic in a special, technical sense distinct from the usual 
meaning. According to Hesiod, the "generation of heroes" was created by Zeus, 
that is to say, by the Olympian principle, with the possibility of reattaining the 
primordial state and thus to give life to a new "golden" cycle. 1 

But in order to realize this, which is only a possibility and no longer a state 
of affairs, it is first necessary to overcome both the "lunar" spirituality and the 
materialized virility, namely, both the priest and the mere warrior or the Titan. 
These archetypes are found in the "heroic" figures of almost every tradition, In 
the Hellenic-Achaean tradition, for instance, Heracles is described as a heroic 
prototype precisely in these terms; his perennial nemesis is Hera, the supreme 
goddess of the lunar-pantheistic cult. Heracles earns Olympian immortality 
after allying himself to Zeus, who is the Olympian principle, against the "gi- 
ants"; according to one of the myths of this cycle, it is through Heracles that the 
"titanic" element (symbolized by Prometheus) is freed and reconciled with the 
Olympian element. 

While, on the one hand, the Titan represents one who does not accept the 
human condition and who wants to steal the divine fire, on the other hand, 
only a small difference separates the herorfrom the Titan. Thus Pindar exhorted 
people not to "yearn to become like gods"; also, in the Hebrew mythology, the 
symbol of Adams curse acted as an analogous warning and indicated a funda- 
mental danger. The titanic type — or, in another respect, the warrior type — is, 
after all, the prime matter of which heroes are made. But in order to implement 
a positive solution to the dilemma, that is, to attain an Olympian transforma- 
tion as the reintegration of the primordial state, it is necessary to fulfill a 
double condition. 

First of all, it is necessary to show the proof and the confirmation of the vir- 
ile qualification; thus in the epic and knightly symbolism we find a series of ad- 
ventures, feats, and fights. This qualification should not become a limitation, a 
hubris, a closure of the "I," and it should not paralyze the capability of opening 
oneself up to a transcendent force, in function of which alone can the fire re- 
ally become light and free itself. Second, such liberation should not signify a 



1. Hesiod, Opera et dies, 156-73. 



; 



20 



On the "Hero" and the "Woman" 



cessation of the inner tension; thus a further test consists in adequately re- 
affirming the virile quality on the supersensible plane. The consequence of this 
is the Olympian transformation or the achievement of that dignity which in 
initiatory traditions has always been designated as "regal" This is the decisive 
point that differentiates the heroic experience from every mystical evasion and 
from every pantheistic confusion; among the various symbols that may refer to 
this point is the symbolism of the woman. 

In the Indo-Aryan tradition, every god — that is, every transcendent 
power — is joined with a bride, and the term sakti, "bride " also means "power" 
In the West, Wisdom (Sophia) and sometimes even the Holy Spirit were repre- 
sented as a royal woman, while in Greek mythology, Hebe, the perennial 
Olympian youth, was given in marriage to Heracles as a wife. In Egyptian fig- 
urations, divine women offer to the kings a lotus, which is a symbol of a rebirth 
and the "key of life " Like the Iranian fravashi, the Nordic Valkyrie are a figu- 
ration of transcendental parts of warriors, the forces of their destinies and vic- 
tories. The Roman tradition knew of a Venus Victrix who was credited with 
generating an imperial stock (Venus Genitrix); the Celtic tradition mentioned 
supernatural women who take warriors to mysterious islands to make them 
immortal with their love. Eve, according to an etymology of the name, means 
"Life," or "the Living One." Thus, without proceeding further with similar ex- 
amples, which I have discussed elsewhere, I wish to emphasize that a very wide- 
spread symbolism has seen in the woman a vivifying and transfiguring power, 
through which it is possible to overcome the human condition. 

What is the foundation of the feminine representation of this power? Since 
every symbolism is based on specific relationships of analogy, it is necessary to 
begin with the possible relationships between man and woman. These rela- 
tionships can be either normal or abnormal. They are abnormal when the 
woman dominates the man. Because the symbolism of the woman connected 
to this second case does not concern the issue I am discussing here, I will not 
dwell on it. I will only say that these are instances of gynecocratic (matriarchal) 
views that must be regarded as residues of the cycle of the "lunar" civilization, 
in which we find a reflection of the theme of man's dependency and passivity 
toward the spirit conceived under a feminine guise (Cosmic Mother or magna 
mater, Mother of Life, etc.); this is a characteristic theme of that cycle. 

However, the more general idea of the woman as the dispenser of the sacrum 
and as a vivifying principle, or as the bearer of a life that liberates, animates, 
and transforms mere being, 2 does not necessarily fall in this category; rather, 
such an idea may be (and indeed often was) considered a part of a spirituality 



2. See my Eros and the Mysteries of Love (Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions, 1983). 



21 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



that I have characterized as "heroic." In this instance, it is necessary to refer to 
the normal relations between man and woman as the basis of the analogy and 
of the symbolism; hence the fundamental concept of a situation in which the 
virile principle retains its own nature. The spirit, vis-^-vis the masculine, is the 
"woman": the virile principle is active* the spirit passive. Even before the power 
that transfigures it and vivifies the hero, the virile principle retains the charac- 
ter that man has as the lord of his woman. In passing, we must note that this is 
exactly the opposite of the bridal symbolism prevalent in religious and espe- 
cially in the Christian mysticism, in which the soul is attributed a feminine 
role, namely, that of the "bride." 

Having said that, and remembering what has been said about the "signs" of 
the center, we find mixed symbols: the Woman of the Island; the Woman of the 
Tree; the Woman of the Fountain; the Woman or Queen of the Castle; the 
Queen of the Solar Land; the Woman hidden in the Stone; and so forth. More 
particularly, as the widow the woman expresses a period of silence, that is, a pe- 
riod in which the tradition, the power, or the strength is no longer possessed, 
has lost her "man," and awaits a new lord or hero. 3 Analogous is the meaning 
of the imprisoned virgin who waits to be freed and married to a preordained 
knight. On this basis, everything that in epic legends and in many chivalric ro- 
mances is described in terms of adventures and heroic struggles undertaken in 
the name of a woman is almost always susceptible to interpretation as a sym- 
bol of the tests of the virile quality, tests that are assigned as a premise for a 
transcendent integration of the human personality. And if in this type of liter- 
ature we also find women who are seductive and who represent a potential 
danger for the hero, this should not be understood solely in a primitive and di- 
rect manner, that is, in terms of a mere carnal seduction. Rather, this should be 
understood on a higher plane as a reference to the danger that a heroic adven- 
ture can lead to a titanic fall. In this case, the woman represents the seductive- 
ness of transcendent power and knowledge when its possession means 
Promethean usurpation and the sin of prevaricating pride. Another, opposite 
aspect may be related with what someone has called "the death which comes 
from a woman," referring to the loss of the deeper principle of virility. 



3. Hence the obvious meaning of the expression "Widow's Son" which has been preserved even in 
Western Freemasonry from the Iranian tradition and from Manichaeism. 



! 



22 



7 



The Hyperborean Theme 



Another fundamental traditional teaching, which I have discussed elsewhere 
with corresponding documentation, 1 is the location of the center or primor- 
dial seat of the Olympian civilization of the Golden Age in a Boreal or Nordic- 
Boreal region that became uninhabitable. A tradition of Hyperborean origins, 
in its original Olympian form or in its new emergences of a heroic type, is at 
the basis of founding or civilizing deeds performed by races that spread into 
the Eurasian continent during the period from the end of the glacial age 
through the Neolithic Era. Some of these races must have come directly from 
the North; others seem to have had as their country of origin a Western- 
Atlantic land in which some kind of replica of the Northern center had been 
established. This is the reason why various concordant symbols and memories 
refer to a land that sometimes is Northern-Arctic and other times Western. 

Among the many designations of the Hyperborean center that came to be 
applied also to the Atlantic center was Thule, or "White Island " or "Island of 
Splendor" (the Hindu Sveta-dvlpa; the Hellenic Leuke island; 2 the "original 
seed of the Arian race" or Ariyana Vaego in ancient Iran); and "Land of the 
Sun," or "Land of Apollo" that is, Avalon. Concordant memories in all Indo- 
European traditions talk about the disappearance of such a seat (which later on 
was mythologized) following an ice age or a flood. This is the real, historical 



1. Revolt Against the Modern World, Chapters 24-26. 

2. Especially in the tradition referred to by Diodorus Siculus (Bibliotheca Historica II, 47), the 
AsvKrj Nrjaog, or White Island, is identified with the land of the Hyperboreans; it was situated in 
the ocean, before the land of the Celts; it is also indicated as Apollo's island. 



23 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



counterpart of the various allusions to something that, beginning with a given 
period, has allegedly been lost or become hidden and untraceable. This too is 
the reason why the "Island" or "Land of the Living" (the term "living" here re- 
ferring to the members of the original divine race), which is the land to which 
the well-known symbols of the Supreme Center of the world allude, was often 
confused with the "region of the dead" (the term "dead" here referring to the 
extinct race). Thus, for instance, according to a Celtic doctrine, mankind's pri- 
mordial ancestor was the god of the dead (Dispater) who dwells in a faraway 
region beyond the ocean, in those "faraway islands" whence, according to the 
Druids' teachings, some of the prehistoric inhabitants of Gaul came directly, 3 
Moreover, according to a classical tradition, after having been the lord of this 
earth, the king of the Golden Age, Kronos-Saturn, was dethroned and castrated 
(that is, deprived of the power to beget, to give life to a new stock); he still lives, 
though asleep, in a region located in the Far North, close to the Arctic Sea, 
which was also called the Cronid Sea. 4 

This generated various confusions, but essentially it is always the same 
transposition in superhistory, under the species of a latent or invisible reality 
or center, of ideas referring to the Hyperborean theme. For my purposes, I will 
need to discuss briefly the form that these memories assumed in the Celtic and 
especially in the Irish cycle: the traditions concerning Avalon, the Tuatha de 
Danaan, and the kingdom of Arthur, The scope of these traditions is more than 
local and historical; often, even the geographical data appearing in them have 
a merely symbolic meaning, as is often the case in these instances. 



3. The Irish name "Land Beneath the Waves" (Tir fa Tonn), applied to an image of this region, in- 
corporates a memory of its sinking and submersion. 

4. Here it is the land of Thule, which, according to Strabo (ca. 63 B.CE.-after 21 c.e.) was located 
at six days of navigation from the coast of Britannia, close to the frozen sea. In regard to the heroes 
of the primordial age, there is an interesting tradition according to which Kronos, already king of 
that age, often appears as king of the heroes (Hesiod, Opera et dies, 168^7 1 ). 



24 



8 



The Tradition in Ireland 



The legendary history of Ireland is based on the events of races that later in- 
vaded it and dominated it, coming from a mysterious Northern-Atlantic cen- 
ter, to which they sometimes returned. The Historia britorum often gives to this 
center the name Hiberia, but in truth such a term is only an imaginative ren- 
dering of the Irish names Magh-Mo, Tragh-Mor, or Magh-Mell, designating 
the "Land of the Dead/' namely, the primordial Northern-Atlantic center. 
There are many stories surrounding such races: they were in perennial conflict 
with the Fomors, giants or dark and monstrous beings who, in the Chris- 
tianized elements of the saga, were significantly assimilated to the antediluvian 
giants or to savage beings descending from Shem and from Cain. These 
Fomors are the equivalent of the "elemental natures" or giants who were the 
mortal foes of the Aesir, the "divine heroes" in the Nordic tradition of the Edda. 
The Fomors represent the powers of a cycle of a Bronze Age, the obscure tel- 
luric forces that were associated with the depth of the waters (in the Ulster 
cycle), just as the telluric Poseidon previously was. In other words, they corre- 
spond to the forces of the original cycle that became materialized and degen- 
erated in a titanic sense. This latter aspect can be derived from Celtic 
traditions, considering that the king of the Fomors, Tethra, was sometimes be- 
lieved to be born in the mysterious land beyond the ocean, and that the un- 
conquerable tower of Conaan (another Fomor king), which was located in the 
"Glass Island in the middle of the sea," is, after all, an obvious symbol of the 
primordial center. 

In any event, the Fomors, in their essential aspect as an obscure and telluric 
race, are defeated by a first nucleus of civilizers who came to Ireland from the 



25 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



Atlantic region and from the race of Partholan. Eventually this race became ex- 
tinct and was followed by a second people of the same origins, the race of 
Neimheidh. That name, which derives from a Celtic root meaning "heavenly/' 
but also "ancient," "venerable " and "sacred ," allows us to conceive this new 
cycle as the creation of the representatives of the primordial tradition still in a 
pure, Olympian state. 

A symbolic episode during the age of Neimheidh recalls a counterpart in the 
Edda. In the Edda, the Aesir, or "divine heroes," turn to the elemental beings to 
make them rebuild the fortress of the central region, Midgard's Asgard. As a re- 
ward for such a job, the giants want the divine woman Freya, and also the 
moon and the sun. After they are refused (the Aesir having thwarted this 
usurpation of the forces from above, brought about by their employment of 
elemental powers) a struggle ensues, which culminates in the fatal "twilight of 
the gods " Likewise, in the Irish cycle, Neimheidh employs the Fomors to build 
a fortress, but then, fearing that they may occupy it, he exterminates them. This 
is to no avail, since the descendants of Neimheidh end up being subjected to 
the Fomors, who inhabit the Tor-Inis, a fortress in an island located northwest 
of Ireland. In this place, during an attempted rebellion, Neimheidh's descen- 
dants are massacred, just as in the saga of the Edda the struggle against ele- 
mental forces ends at first in a defeat of the Aesir. In both cases, we most likely 
have the figuration of the advent of a "titanic" cycle on the ruins of a civili- 
zation that is directly derived from the primordial one. 

At this point of the unfolding of the Irish legend, an attempt at heroic 
restoration occurs. It is the cycle of the Tuatha de Danaan, a name that means 
"the people of the goddess Anu or Dana." This race, on the one hand, is be- 
lieved to have come to Ireland from "heaven" — hence, according to the Leabhar 
na h-uidhre (Book of the dun cow), "their wisdom and sublimity of their 
knowledge." On the other hand, they are believed to have acquired a super- 
natural knowledge in the Hyperborean region. 1 These two versions do not con- 
tradict each other, but rather shed light on each other, owing both to the 
more-than-human character of the primordial center, and to the fact that, ac- 
cording to the legend, the race of the Tuatha derived from surviving members 
of the Neimheidh race. These survivors allegedly traveled to the Hyperborean 
or Western-Atlantic land in order to acquire supernatural knowledge, which 
explains a relationship with certain mystical objects, more on which later. 

Since the race of Neimheidh was the "heavenly" and "ancient" race that was 
swept away by a titanic cycle, the overall meaning is probably that this was a 
reintegrating contact with the original spiritual center (a center that is both 



1. Battle of the Magh-Tured, 1-3. 

26 



The Tradition in Ireland 



heavenly and ? in the geographic transposition of the memory, Hyperborean or 
Western-Atlantic). This contact reanimates and bestows a heroic form to the 
new stock, the Tuatha de Danaan, who eventually defeat the Fomors and sim- 
ilar races (the Firbolgs) and conquer Ireland. 2 The leader of the Tuatha, Ogme, 
is a "solar" figure (Grian Ainech), endowed with traits similar to those of the 
Doric Heracles. Ogme eventually captures the sword of the king of the Fomors. 

However, the rule of the Tuatha also ended. The Leabhar gabhdla (Book of 
invasions) mentions the advent in Ireland of a new race, that of the "sons of 
Mileadh," whose physiognomy is not clear. In this race the warrior element pre- 
dominates — it seems that Mileadh has the same root as miles (soldier) — yet it 
is not distinct from residues of the highest tradition proper to the previous 
cycle of the Tuatha. Thus even in the civilization of Mileadh we find the sym- 
bolism of the "central seat." The constitution of this people is feudal, with a 
supreme regality established in Tara, in the "Land of the Middle" (Meadhon), 
which already had been a sacred center of the Tuatha. Their king used to be 
consecrated by the "stone of destiny" (lia-fail), more on which later. This too 
belonged to the tradition of the Tuatha. As for the Tuatha themselves, accord- 
ing to some texts they allegedly left the country, assuming an invisible form as 
the inhabitants of marvelous "subterranean" palaces or of mountainous caves 
inaccessible to mortal men, among whom they appear only in exceptional 
cases. According to other texts, they returned to their original home in Avalon. 3 

According to what has been said, the two versions are equivalent, since they 
are two different figurations of the primordial center that became hidden 
("subterranean") and inaccessible. In Celtic traditions, images of the Atlantic 
"island" of Avalon continued to be applied to it. Such an island was mainly 
conceived, in later times, as a place inhabited by women who attract heroes 
there to make them immortal The name Avalon was explained on the basis of 
the Cymric term afal, which means "apple," or "Island of Apples " 4 This is 



2. To this we may relate the tradition referred by Plutarch, according to whom in the Boreal land 
Heracles' stock (the heroic cycle) allegedly mixed with that of Kronos (primordial cycle), bringing 
about a civilization "similar to the Hellenic one" (the Olympian -heroic civilization of which 
Heracles was the symbol): "Thus Heracles is attributed the highest honor, and after him^ Kronos" 
(De facie in orbe lunae, 26). 

3. C. Squire, The Mythology of Ancient Britain and Ireland (London, 1909). The tradition of the 
Tuatha continues somewhat in the heroic cycle of the Ulster, who were regarded as their descen- 
dants, with a solar character analogous to that of Greek heroes. 

4. From the woman of the faraway island Condla receives an apple that, no matter how much one 
eats of it, always grows back and reawakens in him an invincible nostalgia. This is the theme of the 
cornucopia, which will appear also in the Grail, together with the nostalgia that the latter induces 
in those who have once seen it. 



27 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



naturally reminiscent of the island of the Hesperides, "beyond the ocean," with 
the symbolic golden apples that Heracles captured in yet another of the labors 
that won him Olympian immortality. The supernatural women of the island of 
Avalon apparently possess the gift of health: in the legend of Tir na Nog they 
declare that in their land "there is no death nor dissolution of the body" and 
that in it the hero Oisin will be crowned "King of Eternal Youth" 5 

At the same time, Avalon, the "White Island," 6 has also the value of a "polar" 
and "solar" island. Avalon, according to another possible etymology, is none 
other than the island of Apollo, the Greek god who was called by the Celts 
Ablun or Belen; thus this island represents the solar land and the Hyperborean 
region, since Apollo had also been considered a solar king of the Golden Age 
and of the Hyperborean region. 7 The frequent confusion of this island with the 
"Glass Island" must be due to a general symbolism of glass walls and even of 
walls of air, signifying an invisible defense surrounding some places, blocking 
their entrance, and also, according to yet another symbol, of a fiery revolving 
wall around this island. These are variations on the theme of inviolability, 
which was always attributed to the Supreme Center. 

The text known as the Battle ofMagh-Tured (sections 3-6) relates that the 
Tuatha brought with them from the Northern-Atlantic seat four objects that 
were strictly related to the teaching they received there: a stone, a spear, a 
sword, and a bowl. The stone is the "fatidic stone" or "royal stone," so called be- 
cause, acting as a sort of oracle, it allows one to recognize the legitimate king 
among various pretenders to the throne. The spear is the spear of Lug, the god 
of thunder, of which it is said that "never was a battle lost by him who bran- 
dished it." The sword is the invincible and inexorable sword of Nuadu. Finally, 
the bowl of Dagde is able to magically satiate with its contents any number of 
warriors. These objects of the Tuatha will reappear in corresponding objects of 
the Grail cycle, just as the Grail's seat will be shown to be in close relation to 
the very island of Avalon, or "White Island " 

In the traditions gathered in the Annals of the Four Teachers we find very visi- 
bly the theme of the struggle and of victory as a test. An ever-recurring formula 



5. The term avatlach means apple, the apple that bestows immortality. 

6. The names Albion, referring to England, and Albania, referring to a part of it, come from an ap- 
plication to these lands of this ancient image of the White Island or Island of Splendor. In Hindu 
tradition the seat of Vishnu> the solar god who carries the Hyperborean cross or swastika, is called 
Sveta dvlpa. 

7. One of the figurations of the land I am talking about is the so-called ten-magh-trogaigi, which 
includes the following symbols characteristic of the central seat: regal women; the silver tree with 
the sun at the top; the tree of victory; a fountain; a bowl containing a beverage that never runs out. 
All of these symbols will appear again in the knightly sagas. 



28 



The Tradition in Ireland 



is: "King X fell to X who became king instead." Its deepest meaning reminds us 
of the legend of the King of the Woods of Nemi, which I have discussed in my 
Revolt Against the Modem World. In this legend, to defeat and kill a given person 
appears to introduce one directly to the regal and priestly function held by that 
person, and also to the quality of becoming the bridegroom of the "divine 
woman" 8 Medieval chivalric romance is filled with variations on this theme: the 
test of arms introduces, often almost automatically, the possession of a woman, 
who goes from one hero to another. On the basis of the so-called love right, ac- 
cording to the ethics of this literature, it was regarded almost as a natural thing 
for a knight to desire his own lord's wife, provided he believed to be and could 
prove to be better than he in the test of arms. 9 The peculiar character that all this 
presents, if taken literally, and its scarce correspondence with the effective cus- 
toms of the time, should already induce us to suppose a hidden content as the 
true meaning of such adventures. 10 In these adventures, moreover, one finds dis- 
tant echoes of the theme of the selection of that virile quality which is most fit to 
qualify one to obtain possession of the "woman " 

According to the Historia regum britanniae f Britain was originally inhabited 
by giants. The main one among them was called Goemagot. Brute, conceived 
as one of the descendants of the Trojans who founded Rome, exterminated 
these giants and established the Britannic tradition. Goemagot visibly corre- 
sponds to Gog and Magog; this is indeed a significant biblical echo. Gog and 
Magog were demonic populations that will play an important role in the im- 
perial myth. They correspond to the Fomors, to the "elemental beings" or 
rinthursi, to whom the "divine heroes" of the Edda (i.e., the Aesir) block the 
path with a wall, thus preventing them from occupying the "Seat of the Center," 
the Midgard, which is a particular representation of the primordial center. In a 
certain sense they represent the demonic character of the world of the masses. 

The Annals of the Four Teachers mentions several revolts against the sacred 
dynasty of the Tuatha de Danaan and against the later warrior dynasty of the 
sons of Mileadh. These insurrections were sparked by the race of the Fir- 
Domhnain or "race of the abyss " a telluric race associated with degenerated 
residues of previous inhabitants of Ireland, such as the Firbolgs. Finally, we 
find mention of a "plebeian race" (aithe-ach~tuaiha)> which during a feast day 



8. Revolt Against the Modern World, trans. Guido Stucco (Rochester, Vt: Inner Traditions, 1995), 
chapter 2. 

9. In Le Chevalier de la charrette, Arthur's wife will be taken away by an armed knight who chal- 
lenges Arthur, provided he can win the duel. 

10. Note the peculiar character of the knightly law (if taken literally) according to which the win- 
ner automatically inherited the vanquished's lady or "regal woman" and had to possess her, more 
as a duty than as a right. 



29 
It 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



massacres the nobility and induces the Four Lords to rebel against the supreme 
lord of the Seat of the Center. As a punishment for such violence the land is 
stricken by a widespread sterility, accompanied by all sorts of plagues: the king- 
dom will remain in this state of desolation until the son of the last king, who 
had been defeated and killed, will return to his father's land. In the Eastern saga 
of Alexander, the devastation and the sterility of "all the waters, so severe that 
it left no potable water," are referred to the time of the advent of the people of 
Gog and Magog. This is the same condition that affects the kingdom of the 
Grail, which became the gaste Terre, the land ravaged because of the Dolorous 
Stroke, a condition that will last until the arrival of the avenging and restoring 
hero. This body of ancient traditions and Celtic pre-Christian symbols presents 
the principal themes that will be embodied again in the Grail cycle. The next 
link in the chain is the legend of King Arthur. 






30 



9 



The Arthurian Cycle 



In all the forms of this legend, the historical reality of Arthur (who allegedly 
was the dux bellorum of the Nordic Cimres as they struggled against the Anglo- 
Saxons between the fifth and sixth century C.E.), is secondary compared to the 
aspect according to which we are led to see in his kingdom an image of the cen- 
tral regal function strictly connected to the Hyperborean tradition, to the point 
that it gained a value as this function in itself, with symbolic and supra- 
historical characters. Thus the relation between Arthur's kingdom and England 
becomes accidental; in medieval literature this kingdom had instead a supra- 
national meaning, and it embraced the best chivalry. The suggestiveness that it 
exercised on the heroic medieval Christianity was so great that (a) the latter 
came to see in Arthur its symbolic leader and (b) the ambition of every knight 
was to become a member of the mysterious Order of King Arthur, which is in 
itself a particularly significant fact. 

The name Arthur is susceptible to various interpretations, the most reliable 
of which attributes to it the Celtic words arthos (bear) and vivos (man). 
Nennius had already explained: Arthur latine sonat ursum horribilem} This 
meaning of a dreadful virile force is connected with a symbolism of 
Hyperborean origin and at the same time points to the idea of a central or 
"polar" function. In fact, the bear is one of the sacred symbols of the ancient 
Nordic cult and simultaneously, in astronomic symbolism, corresponds to the 
"polar" constellation Ursa Major. Moreover, in the corpus of traditional texts, 
symbols and names eventually establish a relation between this constellation 



1. S. Singer, Die Arthur Sage (Bern-Leipzig, 1926), 17. 



31 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



(with the symbolism of the pole or of the center referred to it) and Thule, a 
name designating the Hyperborean "White Island," the traditional center. 2 
Thus the polar, the Hyperborean, and the regal elements converge in the figure 
of Arthur. The unilaterally virile and warrior aspect that could be supposed in 
Arthur as an ursus horribilis is also modified in the legend by Arthur's being al- 
ways accompanied, as some kind of complement or counterpart, by Myrddhin 
or Merlin, who holds a spiritual knowledge and power. This Merlin seems less 
a distinct person and more the personification of the transcendent and spiri- 
tual side of Arthur himself. 3 

The strict connection between the warrior and the spiritual principles al- 
ready characterizes the chivalry of King Arthur's court as well as the meaning 
of the most typical adventures attributed to its members. The Knights of the 
Round Table, that is, of King Arthur, are not mere warriors: 

And when they are chosen to be of the fellowship of the Round Table, they 
think themselves more blessed and more in worship than if they got half 
the world; and ye have seen that they have lost their fathers and mothers, 
and all their kin, and their wives and their children, for to be of the 
Fellowship. 4 

The Grail itself may represent the transcendent element by which this 
knighthood aspired to be complemented: this will be clearly seen in the ver- 
sions of the legend in which Arthur's kingdom is confused with the Grail's. At 
this point it may be worth recalling the episode concerning the stones of 
Stonehenge, which still exist and are a*source of interest and bewilderment, 
since it is a mystery how these gigantic blocks could have been cut and carried 
so long ago to the place where they have been found; these stones appear to be 
the remains of a great solar temple dating back to the Megalithic or to the 
Neolithic. Merlin, by ordering his warriors to go fetch such huge stones from 
faraway peaks, says: "Go to work, brave warriors, and learn, by rolling forward 
these stones, whether physical strength surpasses the spirit or whether the spirit 
surpasses physical strength." The warriors prove unable to do this, but Merlin 
is able to accomplish this task laughingly and effortlessly. That the warrior 
virtue had, in the Arthurian cycle, a spiritual reference point can be seen from 
this exhortation in the same text, the Historia regum britanniae: "Fight on for 



2. R. Guenon, Le Roi du monde, chapter 10. 

3. After all, the name Bear (Bjorn) was applied in Nordic traditions to Thor, who is one of the heav- 
enly heroes or Aesir, struggling against elemental beings; in the Ynglingasaga, the bear and the wolf 
are forms taken by Odin, the supreme chief of Valhalla and of Midgard, or "Central Seat." 

4. Le Morte D'Arthur, ed. Janet Cowen (New York: Penguin Books, 1986 reprint), 14.2. 



32 



The Arthurian Cycle 



your own land, and even welcome death, if necessary; for death is a victory and 
the liberation of the soul" This is exactly the ancient view of the mors tri- 
umphalis, which is a main feature of the ethics of heroic traditions. 

According to the legend, Arthur demonstrated his innate right to be the le- 
gitimate king of all of England by passing the so-called test of the sword, 
namely, by successfully taking a sword out of a great quadrangular stone on the 
altar of the temple, obviously a variation of the ''stone of kings" that belonged 
to the ancient tradition of the Tuatha de" Danaan. 5 Here we find a double, con- 
vergent symbolism. On the one hand, we have the general symbolism of the 
"foundation stone," which hints at the polar idea; thus the allegory and the 
myth allegedly refer to a virile power (i.e., the sword) that needs to be drawn 
from that principle. On the other hand, to take the sword out of the stone may 
also signify the freeing of a certain power from matter, since the stone often 
represents this meaning. 

This also agrees with another episode in the legend, that in which Arthur, 
led by Merlin, seizes the sword Caliburn or Excalibur, which is held by a mys- 
terious arm hovering over the waters. 6 But this weapon, forged in Avalon, is re- 
lated to the Supreme Center; its being held above the water symbolizes a force 
detached from the conditions of the material, passional, and contingent life, to 
which a fundamental aspect of the symbolism of water always referred. Such a 
life must be overcome, not only by those who yearn to receive a regal mandate 
from the "center" and become leaders of men in a higher sense, but also by 
every knight who wants to be worthy of belonging to the followers of Arthur 
and ultimately to find the Grail again. 

Among the themes proper to the ancient Britannic tradition, I will mention 
again the institution of the Round Table and the symbolism of King Arthur's 
seat. Concerning the latter, we often find the recurrence of the famous symbols 
of the inaccessible land: according to Andrea Cappellano, Arthur's is a kingdom 
separated from the human world by a large river, and it can be accessed only by 
crossing a dangerous bridge. This kingdom is defended by giants; in it there is 
a castle that is constantly revolving. In this castle, which is called "regal castle" 
(Caer Rigor) or "rich men's castle" (Caer Golud), there is a supernatural vessel 
that, according to the tradition of The Spoiling of Annwn, was taken by King 
Arthur from a king of the "other world." This vessel — which, like the Grail in 
the castle of the "rich" king, is a facsimile of the vessel Dagde, one of the sym- 
bols proper to the Hyperborean tradition of the Tuatha de Danaan — "satiates" 



5. Siegfried, in the Nordic-German saga, successfully completes a similar test: he takes out of a tree 
a sword stuck in it, which is something no one else had been able to do. 

6. Le Morte D 'Arthur, 1.25. 



33 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



everybody, heals all wounds, and protects from the erosion of time, all the 
while denying its gifts to cowards and oath breakers. 

Such a seat, as a revolving castle (Caer Sidi), is one and the same with the 
"rotating island" that in the ancient Celtic saga is often the equivalent of the 
Glass Island and, in general, of Avalon; here we definitely find an allusion to the 
polar land that spins around its axis and carries along the world in its rotating 
motion. This is a visible reminder of the image of the Universal Ruler 
(cakravartin), an expression that literally means "the spinner of the wheel," in 
reference to him who, as an immobile center, moves the wheel of the regnum 
and of the ordered universe. 

These ideas can also be found in the symbolism of the Round Table, which 
was instituted by Arthur, under Merlin's advice, to characterize the knightly 
order of which he was the supreme leader. According to Sir Thomas Malory's 
text, the Round Table was built as an image of the world; in it the entire uni- 
verse, the earthly and the heavenly, is believed to find shelter. 7 In other texts, a 
reference is made to the course of the stars and to the rotation of the heavens 
in relation to an unmovable center. From this it can be clearly seen that the 
knights who sit at the Round Table are also the representatives of the ordering 
central power. 

In different versions these knights of the Round Table, or at least the best 
among them, are twelve in number; this points to a visible correspondence 
with the twelve peers who in the Roman de Brut "divide the earth in twelve 
parts, each one taking one part as his estate, and calling himself its king.'" 
Twelve is a solar number that always appeared, in various forms, wherever the 
establishment of a traditional center was either accomplished or attempted: for 
instance, the twelve thrones of Midgard; the twelve supreme Olympian gods; 
the twelve stumps of the Delphic center; the twelve Roman lictors; the twelve 
residents of Avallonia; and the twelve counts/paladins of Charlemagne. 
Moreover, in the cycle of the Grail and of King Arthur, such symbolism was 
connected with a further theme, that of the Siege Perilous, a seat at the Round 
Table purposely left vacant and reserved for an awaited and predestined knight, 
superior to everybody else, who sometimes is portrayed as the thirteenth 
knight and who clearly corresponds to the same supreme function of a center, 
of a leader or pole for the twelve, and who is the image or representative of the 
cakravartin or Universal Ruler. 8 



7. Le Morte D' Arthur, 14.2. 

8. At this point one may be induced to think of Christ and of his twelve disciples; truthfully, there 
are several references of this sort in the Christianized parts of the legend. However, this symbolism 
is supratraditional and much earlier than Christianity; the Christian figuration is merely a partic- 
ular adaptation of it within a religious context. 



34 



The Arthurian Cycle 



Naturally, when the theme of the Siege Perilous appears, one must think 
about a state of involution of Arthur's kingdom or of decadence of his repre- 
sentatives, such that it necessitates a restoration. Ideally, this is the point at 
which the Knights of the Round Table go in search of the Grail and at which, 
in the corresponding literature, the adventures of the Grail and those of the 
knights of King Arthur are inextricably connected. Generally speaking, the 
kingdom of Arthur is identified with that of Locris or Logres, an ancient des- 
ignation of England, like "Albania," or "White Island" which was regarded as 
the seat of the Grail The knights of Arthur go in search of the Grail in order to 
restore the kingdom to its ancient splendor and to destroy the magic spells that, 
according to the Mabinogion> have stricken the land. The Grail is the symbol of 
that which has been lost and must be found again, A person must ensure that 
the Grail manifests again its virtues; often this person is also the knight who 
will sit at the Siege Perilous. 

In relation to all this, the figure of King Arthur appears to be split in two. 
On the one hand, there is a suprahistorical King Arthur who symbolizes a 
function; on the other hand, there is a King Arthur who, as a historical repre- 
sentative of this function, is at the center of events that have a fatal outcome 
and that can be connected to the ancient tales concerning the destruction and 
the disappearance of the Tuatha de Danaan and their descendants. At this 
point, without anticipating anything substantial, I will briefly refer to the epi- 
logue of the ancient legend of Arthur, in which we find the recurrence of the 
symbolism of the woman. 

Two characters attempt to steal Arthur's woman, Quennuwar (that is, 
Guinevere, a name that means "white spirit " confirming her symbolic charac- 
ter). The first of these characters is Maelvas, who takes her to his own town, 
Glastonbury, identified with the oceanic Glass City and with Avalon (Glastonia, 
id est, urhs vitrea — etiam insula Avalloniae celebriter nominatur). Consequently, 
the Glass Island is besieged; eventually a reconciliation is achieved. At this point 
a Christian element sneaks into the legend, since in this circumstance Arthur 
allegedly gives away the island as an estate to a Church representative, granting 
him immunity. In reality, this points again to an attempt, on the part of the 
Christian tradition, to replace the Celtic- Hyperborean tradition by appropriat- 
ing all of its main themes. Glastonbury was one of the main centers of the 
spread of Christianity in England; to gain more prestige, it attempted to absorb 
in a Christianized form the previous Nordic-Celtic traditions, until it eventu- 
ally claimed for itself the role of ancient Avalon. According to the main text on 
the subject, the De antiquitate glastoniensis ecclesiae, Glastonia, or Glastonbury, 
was originally called ygnis gutrin, ygnis in Breton meaning insula and gutrin 
meaning vitrea; with the arrival of the English people, it became Glastiburi 



35 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



(from Glas = vitrum and buria = civitas), or Glastiberia. 9 The story of Arthur's 
donation of the island to the Church is some kind of excuse for a "traditional 
succession" fabricated by Christian missionaries. Nor did the forgery end there: 
in reference to the above-mentioned tragic epilogue of the ancient legend, it 
was claimed that Arthur died and that his sepulcher was located in Glaston- 
bury. Thus the ancient center was retained, this time with the new meaning of 
the center of missionary Christianity. 

Second, while Arthur is attempting to realize his legendary world empire 
and to conquer even Rome in order to be crowned emperor therein, his 
nephew Modred, who remained at home, usurps the throne and takes pos- 
session of Arthur's woman, Guinevere. In the war that ensues the traitor is 
killed, but the best knights of the Round Table also die. Arthur himself is mor- 
tally wounded; he is taken to Avalon, that the health-restoring techniques of the 
women inhabiting that land (especially Morgande's) may heal him and allow 
him to resume his function. 10 But Arthur's wounds (especially the one pro- 
duced by a poisoned spear, according to some writers) open up again every 
year while his faithful subjects at home vainly await his return. There is a tra- 
dition, however, according to which one day Arthur will return from Avalon to 
resume his reign: this is why the Britons, since then, never wanted to appoint 
another king. 11 In other forms of the legend — for instance, in the Otia imperi- 
alia by Gervasius of Tilbury — Arthur is portrayed lying in bed in a wonderful 
palace located on top of a mountain. According to another version, which is 
tendentiously Christian, Arthur has "died" and his body has been buried in that 
abbey of Glastonbury, which, as we have seen, was portrayed as Avalon itself. 

All this may be referred to a crisis and to an interregnum that will be fol- 
lowed by the quest of the Grail. In the meantime we have identified another 



9. Glastonbury was itself in prehistoric times a center of the primordial tradition, as is suggested 
by the presence of vestiges of some kind of huge star temple, defined by the track on the ground 
of gigantic effigies representing the constellations and arranged in a circle. 

10. In Le Morte D 'Arthur (21.7) we read: "Yet some men say in many parts of England that King 
Arthur is not dead, but had by the will of our Lord Jesu into another place; and men say that he 
shall come again, and he shall win by the holy cross. I will not say that it shall be so, but rather I 
will say, here in this world he changed his life. But many men say that there is written upon his 
tomb the verse c Hic iacet Arthurus, Rex quondam Rexque futurus'" In the same text, the wounded 
Arthur wants his sword returned to that mysterious arm holding it above the waters; this has the 
visible meaning of a restitution of his mandate. 

11. There is a further interference with the previously mentioned motifs (more on which later), 
namely, that version of the saga according to which Arthur will return from Avalon at the time of 
a decisive battle against the Britons' enemies; this battle is supposed to be the "last battle" (see 
Natrovissus, "Le mythe arthurien et la legend de Merlin," Ogam, issues 6, 10, 13 [1950]). 



36 



The Arthurian Cycle 



fundamental theme in the Grail cycle: the wounded king who waits to be 
healed in an inaccessible and mysterious seat, so that he may "return" once 
again. We should recall, likewise, the other preexistent theme in the Celtic saga, 
namely, the kingdom stricken by devastation and by barrenness owing to the 
plebeian revolt or to the king's wound caused by a spear or a flaming sword. 



37 



10 

The Imperial Saga and 
the Universal Ruler 



When considered from the above-mentioned perspective, Arthur's saga ap- 
pears to be one of the many forms of the general myth of the Emperor or in- 
visible Universal Ruler and of his manifestations. It is a theme that dates back 
to the most ancient times and that bears a certain relation to the doctrine of the 
"cyclical manifestations" or avatars, namely, the manifestation, occurring at 
special times and in various forms, of a single principle, which during inter- 
mediate periods exists in an unmanifesfed state. 1 Thus every time a king dis- 
played the traits of an incarnation of such a principle, the idea arose in the 
legend that he has not died but has withdrawn to an inaccessible seat whence 
one day he will manifest himself, or that he is asleep and will awaken one day. 
And just as the suprahistorical element in these cases overlaps the historical el- 
ement, by turning a real figure into a symbolic one, likewise the opposite oc- 
curs; that is, the names of these real figures sometimes survive, yet designate 
something that transcends them. 

The image of a regality in a state of sleep or apparent death, however, is akin 
to that of an altered, wounded, paralyzed regality, in regard not to its intangible 
principle but to its external and historical representatives. Hence the theme of 
the wounded, mutilated, or weakened king who continues to live in the inac- 
cessible center, in which time and death are suspended. 



1. Alain of Lille significantly compared Arthur's disappearance with those of Elijah and Enoch, 
prophets who never died and who will return one day. 



38 



The Imperial Saga and the Universal Ruler 



Without repeating what I have discussed elsewhere, in order to give a gen- 
eral and universalized idea of the context being discussed I will mention some 
typical forms in which this symbolism was expressed in ancient times. 

In the Hindu tradition we encounter the theme of Mahakasyapa, who 
sleeps in a mountain but will awaken at the sound of shells at the time of the 
new manifestation of the principle that previously manifested itself in the form 
of Buddha. Such a period is also that of the coming of a Universal Ruler 
(cakravartin) by the name of Samkha. Since samkha means "shell," this verbal 
assimilation expresses the idea of the awakening from sleep of the new mani- 
festation of the King of the World and of the same primordial tradition that the 
above-mentioned legend conceives to be enclosed (during the intermediate pe- 
riods of crisis) in a shell An analogous Iranian tradition refers to the hero 
Kereshaspa, who, having been wounded by an arrow while he was immersed in 
a state of slumber (here we find again the same symbolism), survives in a 
lethargic state through the centuries, being nurtured by the fravashi (like the 
wounded Arthur, who is tended by women expert in healing techniques); he 
will come back to life at the time of Saoshyanfs advent and will fight on his 
side. Saoshyant is the lord of a future, triumphal kingdom of the God of Light 
and the slayer of the Arhimanic dark forces: the Jewish notion of a Messiah and 
the Christian notion of God's Kingdom, which many people believe to have 
gready influenced the medieval imperial myth, are nothing but an echo of this 
ancient and pre-Christian Aryo-Iranian concept. 

I must refer here as well to the doctrine of KalM-avatara in relation to the 
story of Parasu-Rama, one of the typical figurations of the heroic representa- 
tive of the primordial Olympian-Hyperborean tradition. When the forefathers 
of the Aryan colonizers of India were still inhabiting a northern seat, this fig- 
ure allegedly slew with his battle-axe some rebellious warriors and even his 
own mother guilty of some crime: these are symbols of the double overcoming 
that I previously (at the end of chapter 7) declared to characterize the "heroic" 
spirit — namely, the overcoming of a degraded virility and of a spirituality that 
shifted to a feminine-maternal tutelage according to an involution and a 
process of degradation (especially when we consider that its action occurred in 
a period between the Silver or Lunar Age (the so-called Treta Yuga) and the 
Bronze or Titanic Age (the so-called Dvapara Yuga). 

Parasu-Rama never died, but withdrew to a mountain named Mahendra to 
live as an ascetic. 2 When the right time comes, in conformity with the cyclical 
laws, a new manifestation from above will occur (Kalki-avatara) in the form of 
a sacred king who will triumph over the Dark Age. Kalki is symbolically 



2. Mahabharata, 1.2, 3.116-17, 12.49, 14.29. 



39 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



thought to be born in Sambhala, one of the names that in the Hindu and 
Tibetan traditions designated the sacred Hyperborean center. 3 His spiritual 
teacher is Parasu-Rama, and after being initiated into the sacred sciences he re- 
ceives the regal investiture. From Siva he receives a white winged horse (which 
in the legend is so important that it came to be identified with Kalki himself), 
an omniscient parrot, 4 and a bright sword. Recall that Arthur is believed to re- 
turn one day on a white horse and that this symbol also plays a famous part in 
the Revelation of Saint John the Divine; recall also Excalibur, the lost sword that 
Arthur will one day yield again and that from time to time emerges from the 
bottom of a lake. 

Led by the parrot, Kalki wins the favors of the woman; he marries Padma or 
Padmavati, a king's daughter whom no man could ever have, since every time 
someone fell in love with her he was transformed by divine will into a 
woman — a symbol with a profound meaning. Kalki and his warriors cross on 
foot a wide sea, which magically turns into stone as they walk over it. Finally he 
reaches his birthplace, Sambhala, which he finds so transformed and wonder- 
ful as to mistake it for the dwelling place of Indra, the king of the gods and the 
god of the heroes. Sambhala is a symbol of the new manifestation of the forces 
of the primordial center; in it we find again the representatives of the solar and 
lunar dynasties, the kings Maru and Deva, who thanks to the power of their as- 
cetic practices remained alive in the Himalayas through the ages of the world, 
up to the most recent Dark Age. Here the Himalayas are conceived as the re- 
gion in which the primordial age lasts forever. Finally a last battle takes place, 
which is Kalkfs struggle against the Dark Age, personified by the goddess Kali 
and by the two chiefs of the demons, rtoka and Vikoka; 5 this struggle is very 



3. The theme of the symbolic birth of the restorator of the Hyperborean center is also found in the 
Iranian tradition and is sometimes applied to Zarathustra himself* who according to some was 
born in the Hyperborean region (Ariyana Vaego) or developed his religion there (see Bundaesh, 
Vendidad, 23/19). Concerning the birth place of Paras u-Rama, if Sambhala is a historical city near 
Delhi, it is also certain that it is always designated as the "Northern City" not only in India but in 
Tibet as well; in any event, in cases like these, every localization is merely symbolic. 

4. In the knightly medieval allegories, the parrot symbolizes knighthood and fights against the 
clergy for the right over the woman. 

5. Koka and Vikoka are visibly the equivalent of Gog and Magog. Kali's mount is a donkey, an an- 
imal traditionally associated with demonic and antisolar forces and to the so-called children of the 
powerless revolt (see my Revolt Against the Modern World, 285-86). Moreover, the town named 
Vishasana, ruled by Kali, in which the goddess seeks shelter from Kalki and which will eventually 
be put to the torch, is a gynecocratic center, ruled by women; this expresses the relation between 
the daemonism of the masses and the usurpation realized by a feminine form of spirituality. 



40 



The Imperial Saga and the Universal Ruler 



hard, since these demons can resurrect each other and return to fight as soon 
as they hit the ground. In the end, however, Kalki will prevail. 6 

Further on, I will discuss in greater detail the symbolic elements found in 
this story, in case the reader has not understood their full meaning. Here I have 
simply wished to introduce some references in order to contextualize from an 
intertraditional perspective the imperial myth of the new manifestations of the 
regnum and to prevent the expressions that this myth had during the Middle 
Ages from being read separately from each other, especially in a unilateral de- 
pendence on Christian beliefs. After all, many people thought that the Roman 
world, in its imperial and pagan phase, signified the beginning of a new Golden 
Age, the king of which, Kronos, was believed to be living in a state of slumber 
in the Hyperborean region. During Augustus's reign, the Sibylline prophecies 
announced the advent of a "solar" king, a rex a coelo or ex sole missus, to which 
Horace seems to refer when he invokes the advent of Apollo, the Hyperborean 
god of the Golden Age. Virgil too seems to refer to this rex when he proclaims 
the imminent advent of a new Golden Age, of Apollo, and of heroes. 7 Thus 
Augustus conceived his symbolic "filiation" from Apollo; the phoenix, which is 
found in the figurations of Hadrian and of Antoninus, is in strict relation to 
this idea of a resurrection of the primordial age through the Roman Empire. 
The foreboding of Rome's connection with the suprahistorical and metaphys- 
ical principle of the imperium may, after all, be considered the basis of the very 
theory of Rome's persistence and aeternitas, provided one is aware of the pre- 
viously mentioned process of transposition of that which is proper to this prin- 
ciple to one of its specific embodiments in history. 

During the Byzantine age, the imperial myth received from Methodius a 
formulation that revived, in relation to the legend of Alexander the Great, some 
of the themes already considered. Here again, we find the theme of a king be- 
lieved to have died, who awakens from his sleep to create a new Rome; after a 
short reign, the people of Gog and Magog, to whom Alexander had blocked the 
path, rise up again, and the "last battle" takes place. 8 



6. In the Visnu Purana (4.3) Kalki plays the same role of slayer of degenerated and desecrated war- 
riors (Mlecchas) which was previously Parasu- Rama's. 

7. Eclogues, 4.5-10 

8. A New Testament apochryphal text, The Apocalypse of Peter, mentions a "son of the lion" (the 
lion symbolizing the empire), who will push back and defeat all the kings of the earth, having been 
empowered to do so by God himself; he is portrayed as "one who has awakened from slumber." 
Even during this period we notice a surfacing of the Hyperborean memory, considering that 
Lactantius (Institutiones, 6.16,3) claims that the mighty prince who will restore justice after Rome's 
fall will come from the "faraway lands of the North " 



41 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



This same idea will be revived and amply developed during the Ghibelline 
Middle Ages. The awaited, hidden emperor, who never died and who withdrew 
to an invisible or inaccessible center, is here transformed into one of the major 
representatives of the Holy Roman Empire: Charlemagne, Frederick I, or 
Frederick II. The complementary theme of a devastated or sterile kingdom 
awaiting renewal finds its equivalent in the theme of the Dry Tree. The Dry 
Tree, associated with the seat of the Universal Ruler, will blossom again at the 
time of a new imperial manifestation and of the victory against the forces of 
the Dark Age that are represented, in conformity to the new biblical and 
Christian religion, by the people of Gog and Magog, who will launch their at- 
tack at the time of the advent of the Antichrist. 

This Christian reading of these ancient symbols, however, does not preclude 
the image of Frederick II or of Arthur asleep on a mountain, or of the latter's 
knights leading a charge from the top of that mountain, from being associated 
with ancient pagan -Nordic views, namely, with Valhalla, the mountain 
dwelling of Odin, leader of the "divine heroes," or with the host of the souls of 
slain warriors, handpicked by women (the Valkyrie). This host can be de- 
scribed both as the Wildes Heer and as the mystical army that, led in battle by 
Odin, will fight the last battle against the "elemental beings ." 

This legend appears with countless variations during the golden age of 
Western chivalry and Ghibellinism. In the prophetic excitement caused by the 
coming of a "third Frederick" the legend finds a proper conclusion in the enig- 
matic formula of the emperor who is both alive and not alive: Oculus eius morte 
claudet abscondita supervivetque, sonabit et in populis: vivit, non vivit, uno ex 
pullis pullisque pullorum superstite. [His feye shuts and loses sight with death, 
but it survives and will sing among the people. He lives and does not live, one 
with the sprouting branches and yet standing apart from the new shoots.] "He 
lives and does not live": the Sibylline formula encompasses the mystery of me- 
dieval civilization at its twilight. The wounded king, the king asleep, the king 
who has died though he appears to be alive and who is alive though he appears 
to be dead, are equivalent or convergent themes that we will find again in the 
Grail cycle. These themes acquire a particular power of suggestion and liveli- 
ness at the final moment of the West's supreme effort to reconstruct itself ac- 
cording to a great civilization that was spiritually virile and traditionally 
imperial. 



42 



11 



Frederick, Prester John, and 
the Tree of the Empire 



An old Italian romance relates that "Prester John, a very noble Indian lord" sent 
an embassy to Emperor Frederick (presumably Frederick II), acknowledging 
him to be "the mirror of the world" in order to learn for himself if this 
Frederick was "wise in words and deeds." Thus three stones were sent by Prester 
John to Frederick; at the same time, the emperor was asked what he thought 
was the best thing in the whole wide world. "The emperor" the tale continues, 
"accepted the stones and did not inquire about their value"; as for the question, 
he answered that the "measure" was the best thing in the world. From this, 
Prester John deduced that "the emperor was wise in words but not in deeds be- 
cause he did not inquire about the most excellent powers of the stones " He 
thought that with the passing of time these stones "would have lost their value, 
since the emperor did not know what their value was " and proceeded to have 
them returned. This happened essentially through one of them, endowed with 
the magic power of invisibility and said- to "be worthier than your whole 
empire." 

According to another legend, preserved by Oswald der Schreiber, Frederick 
II received from Prester John a fireproof garment made of salamander's skin, 
the water of perennial youth, and a ring with three stones, which gave its 
carrier the power to breathe underwater, to be invulnerable, and to become in- 
visible. Prester John s stone was particularly mentioned in German writings of 
the fourteenth century, together with an allusion to the power that made one 
invisible. 



43 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



These legends are very significant, especially if we consider that the king- 
dom of Prester John is only one among the several medieval figurations of the 
Supreme Center. 1 This center was supposed to be located in a mysterious and 
wonderful region in Central Asia, Mongolia, India, or even Ethiopia, the latter 
name having a vague and various meaning. When considering the attributes 
conferred on this kingdom, however, there are no doubts concerning its sym- 
bolic character. Prester John's gifts to Emperor Frederick constitute a sort of 
mandate of a superior character, which was offered to the German representa- 
tive of the Holy Roman Empire that he might establish a real contact with the 
principle of the Universal Ruler. The water of perennial youth visibly has the 
meaning of immortality. The incombustible garment is connected to the power 
of the phoenix to remain unscathed and renew itself in fire. Invisibility is a po- 
tent symbol of the power to contact the invisible and supersensible dimension, 
and to be able to be transferred to it. The power of breathing underwater cor- 
responds to the ability of not sinking or drowning and of walking on water 
(this reminds us of the Kalki- avatar as crossing of the sea, of Arthur's sword 
held above the water, and so or); it signifies the ability to participate in a prin- 
ciple that is superior to the current of the world and to the stream of becom- 
ing. In other words, these are qualifications and powers of a strictly initiatory 
type. 

Having said that, the Italian legend seems to suggest that Frederick was 
somewhat inadequate to receive this mandate. Frederick's limitation is a virtue 
of the chivalry and mere temporal government; the "measure" is the best thing 
in the world. 2 He does not inquire about the symbols of the powers offered to 
him by Prester John. Because of this un&wareness of the highest mandate, his 
function, with the passing of time, was destined to decay, and thus his mandate 
was revoked by Prester John. This is a new version of the formula "he lives and 
yet does not live," referring to the emperor whose life is only apparent, or to the 
lethargic king; this time the version is intimately associated with a fundamen- 
tal theme in the Grail cycle, namely, with the fault of not asking a question that 
would have had a restoring power. 

I would like to add some details to the image of Prester John. The Tractatus 
pulcherrimus referred to him as "king of kings" rex regum. He combined spiri- 
tual authority with regal power and could say about himself: Johannes presbyter, 
divina gratia Dominus dominatium omnium, quae sub caelo sunt ab ortu solis 
usque ad paradisum terrestrem. [Prester John, by divine grace Lord of all the 



1. R. Gu£non, Le Roi du monde, chapter 2. 

2. It is the same virtue that allegedly characterized the fundamental style of the Aryan or Indo- 
European races, according to some scholars who merely analyze their ethical-naturalistic aspect. 



44 



Frederick, Prester John, and the Tree of the Empire 



lords that exist under the sky from the east all the way to the earthly paradise 
(i.e., the Far West).] 3 Yet essentially, "Prester John" is only a title and a name, 
which designates not a given individual but rather a function. Thus in Wolfram 
von Eschenbach and in the Titurel we find "Prester John" as a title; the Grail, as 
we will see, indicates from time to time the person who must become Prester 
John. Moreover, in the legend, "Prester John" designates one who keeps in 
check the people of Gog and Magog, who exercises a visible and invisible do- 
minion (figuratively, dominion over both natural and invisible beings), and 
who defends the access of his kingdom with "lions" and "giants." In this king- 
dom is also found the "fountain of youth " This reign is often confused with the 
seat of the three magi, namely, with the city of Seuva, which was built on or- 
ders of the magi themselves on the Mount of Victory (Vaus or Victorialis). 4 

Moreover, here we find again the "polar" symbolism of the "revolving cas- 
tle" in the image of the heavens and that of the place where there are stones of 
light and stones "that restore sight to the blind" and cause people to become in- 
visible. 5 More particularly, Prester John owns a stone that has the power to re- 
suscitate the phoenix or, in other versions, the eagle; this symbolism does not 
go unnoticed, since the eagle has always represented, and particularly at the 



3, The dignity of a sacred king is often accompanied by biblical reminiscenses, by presenting Prester 
John as the son or nephew of King David, and sometimes as King David himself: Davis regis 
Indorum, qui presbyter Johanne a vulgo appellature — De rege Davis filio regis Johannis. [David, king 
of the Hindus, who is called by the people "Prester John" — the King (Prester John) descends from 
the son of King David.] We shall learn that David was closely related with the sword of the Grail's 
heroes and with the tests they have to undergo. 

4, The Christian legend of the three magi is an attempt to claim for Christianity a traditional char- 
acter in the superior sense that I give to the term, following Guenon's lead. One of the magi pre- 
sented Jesus with gold and hailed him as king; the second presented him with incense and hailed 
him as priest; the third presented him with myrrh, namely, the balsam of immortality, and hailed 
him as prophet. By doing this the magi allegedly gave the acknowledgment due to a presumed rep- 
resentative of the three powers at the primordial undivided state. This acknowledgment is easily 
found in the characters who appear at the birthplace of Kalki to honor him* 

5, In the text of Johannes With De Hese we read: Et ibi est speciale palacium presbiteri Johannes et 
doctorum, ubi tenentur concilia. Et illud potest volvt ad motum rotae, et est testudinatum ad modum 
coeli, et sunt ibidem multi lapides preciosi, lucentes in node, ac si esset clara dies. Ibi sunt lapilli qui 
vocantur midriosi, quos frequenter ad partes nostras deportare solent Aquilae, per quos reinvenescunt 
et lumen recuperant. Si quis ilium in digito portaverit, ei lumen non deficit, etsi si imminuitum resti- 
tuitur et cum plus inspiritur, magis lumen aenttur, Legitimo carmine consacrato hominem reddit in- 
divisibilem. (There is a special palace in which Prester John and other wise men hold council. That 
palace can spin like a wheel and has an arched roof like the heavens; in it there are many precious 
stones that shine in the night as if they were bright days. These little stones, called "midriosi," ea- 
gles often take back to our lands, and through them the light is restored. If someone wears one of 
these little stones on his finger, for him the light does not fail. Even if it is weakened, it is restored, 
and the more the stone is inspected the greater the light shines forth.] 



45 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



time of these legends, the imperial function, which in its "eternal" aspect was 
connected in ancient Rome to the symbol of the phoenix. According to some, 
the Persian king Xerxes, Alexander the Great, the Roman emperors, and finally 
Ogier of Denmark and Guerrinus all visited the kingdom of Prester John. 6 This 
is but a legendary figuration of the obscure sensation of contacts that the great 
historical dominators and the legendary heroes of the past are believed to have 
had with the Supreme Center, the place in which is found the stone that has the 
power of resurrecting the Eagle. 

According to the legend, Alexander, as the crowning accomplishment of his 
conquests, after heading toward India on the path once traveled by Heracles 
and Dionysus, asked the deity the supreme pledge of victory. He reached not 
only the fountain of youth but also the two trees (symbolizing the masculine 
and feminine principles) of the sun and the moon, which announce him his 
destiny and his imperium. 7 In the legends of this cycle we find several mentions 
of the "Tree of the Center," of the "Solar Tree," of the tree that confers victory 
and the Empire, and of the "Tree of Seth " 

On the basis of the vague and mysterious tales of many travelers, during the 
Middle Ages the image of the faraway magnificent empire of the Great Khan, 
emperor of the Tartars, contributed to the revival of the image of the King of 
the World — so much so that it was often confused with the kingdom of Prester 
John. Thus, especially in relation to the saga of the Great Khan, the motif of a 
mysterious tree was developed; he who could find it or hang his shield on it was 
granted victory and universal dominion. Here is a very characteristic text of 
Johannes von Hildesheim: 

Et in ipsa civitate in templi Tartarorum est arbora a'rida, de qua plurima nar- 
ratur in universo mundo . . . ab antiquo in omnibus partibus Orientis, fait 
consuetudinis> et est, quod si quis rex vel dominus vel populus tarn potens 
efficitur, quod scutum vel clipeum suum potentur in illam arborem pendet 
tunc illi regi vel domino in omnibus et per omnia obediunt et intendunt. 

[In this civilization, in the temple of the Tartars, there is a dry tree, about 
which many things are said throughout the whole world. Since ancient 



6. Kings such as Rumania's Manuel were taken by Prester John to live an immortal life in his palace. 

7. This legend of Alexander, which develops some elements of Callistenes' and Julius Valerio's narra- 
tives, corresponds somewhat to another saga of the twelfth century, according to which Alexander, 
upon reaching the place "where the souls of the just await the day of the resurrection of the body" 
namely, earthly paradise, obtains a stone that is the facsimile of Frederick Ifs and Prester John's. Of 
this stone it is said: "If you learn to discern its nature and power, you will be free of every mundane 
ambition." 



46 






Frederick, Prester John, and the Tree of the Empire 



times, in every part of the East there was, and still is, this tradition: if some- 
one wishes to become king or lord, he hangs his leather or metal shield on 
this trees branches until he is obeyed and acknowledged as such.] 

This tree became a point of convergence of various meanings through ver- 
bal assonances. It is not the above-mentioned symbol of the Dry Tree; "Dry 
Tree" in this context is one of the interpretations of the expression arbre solque, 
which was translated as "solar tree" (arbor solis), "solitary tree" (arbre seul) and 
as "Seth's tree" (arbor Seth). Marco Polo, talking about the Great Khan's coun- 
try, wrote: "et il y a un grandisme plain ou est F Arbre Solque, que nous ap- 
pelons P Arbre Sec" Moreover, solque, which has an Arab root, may signify 
"wide, high, lasting"; an English manuscript says that this was not the Dry Tree, 
but Seth's Tree, since Seth grew it out of a sprout taken from the Tree of 
Knowledge, that is, from the central tree of the Garden of Eden. 

The tree that bestows on him who finds it power and universal rule evokes 
a tradition concerning the "primordial state" (alluded to by the Garden of 
Eden), Moreover, both the pair of solar and lunar trees and the double aspect 
of a tree of knowledge and tree of victory refer back to the synthesis of the two 
powers that is inherent in that very state. This synthesis predates the ensuing 
separation or the feminization of the spiritual dimension and the materializa- 
tion of the virile dimension. The connection of the tree of the Empire with the 
tree in the middle of the earthly paradise, as it emerges in these legends, is quite 
natural, considering the above-mentioned relation that occurs between every 
true manifestation of the Empire and the primordial state. The "dryness" of the 
tree refers to a period of decadence that must be overcome. Such a meaning is 
clear, for instance, in the legend according to which the tree will blossom again 
at the encounter between Prester John and Emperor Frederick. 

The image of Prester John's kingdom historically served as the foundation 
of the obscure idea of an integration of the forces hidden behind the symbols 
of chivalry, the Empire, and the Crusades. In a materialistic transposition, this 
powerful and mysterious Oriental prince, who was not a Christian but a friend 
of Christians, was invoked to help the Christian endeavor in the Holy Land 
during its most difficult time, in order to grant a victorious end to the holy war. 
After these hopes were disappointed; after the help in the form of a rescue, 
naively conceived in military terms, failed to materialize; and after people failed 
to recognize what was hidden behind the symbol of Prester John and of his 
"help," his legend lived on as an element of various myths, such as the saga of 
Ogier. 

In Danish tradition, Ogier or Holger is a facsimile of the Ghibelline emperor 
who never died: he is a national hero taken into the depths of a mountain or 



47 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



locked in the cellars of Kronburg's castle, to appear again whenever his land 
will need a savior. It is in the cycle of Charlemagne that Ogier's saga displays 
the features most interesting to this book, since it significantly brings together 
the various themes that I have individuated so fan Ogier of Denmark appears 
as one of Charlemagne's twelve knights, who, after having been in conflict with 
that emperor, ends up assuming the traits both of a savior of the Christian 
world at a time of extreme danger and of a world conqueror. He extends his 
power over the entire East and, like Alexander, travels to the kingdom of Prester 
John, where he sees the two trees, the solar and the lunar; these two trees, we 
may recall, correspond respectively to the tree of the universal power of the 
Great Khan s legend and to the tree of the center associated with the primor- 
dial or "paradisiac w state. 8 Interestingly enough, here Prester John's kingdom is 
identified with Avalon, that is, with the center of the Hyperborean tradition; 9 
moreover, a strict connection is established between the "balsam" of the two 
trees and Ogier's assuming the form of he "who always lives" and "who will re- 
turn one day." In this regard, in Otto von Diemeringen's German translation of 
the travels of John Mandeville, we read: "Man saget auch in den selben Landen 
das Oggier by den selben boumen were und sich spyset mit dem balsam und 
do vo lebt er so lang, und meinen er lebe noch und solle har wider zu inen 
komen" [It is also said in those lands that Ogier was at those same trees and 
took the balsam, which caused him to live so long. They believe he is still alive 
and will return to them again]. 

After his conquest of the East, Ogier finally reaches Avalon, where he be- 
comes the lover of the supernatural woman Morgan, who is Arthur's sister. 
Here he lives secluded from the wo*ld in a state of perennial youth. 
Christendom, however, finding itself in dire straits, needs him again. The 
archangel Michael visits Morgan, and by divine order Ogier appears again in 
the world and achieves victory. At this point a new characteristic theme ap- 
pears, which will be found again in the Grail saga, especially in reference to the 
son of the Grail's king, namely, Lohengrin: the hero who has been sent forth 
from the Supreme Center must not reveal his name nor the place from which 
he comes. The function that he embodies and that is truly acting in him must 



8. The two trees may be related with the solar and the lunar dynasties, the representatives of which, 
according to the legend of Kalki-avatara, never died, but are awaiting Kalki's coming in order to 
manifest themselves again; this event is also found in another form in the medieval sagas, in the 
symbol of the blossoming of the Dry Tree. 

9. This same relation is also found, indirectly and more obscurely, in the Italian and French sagas 
of Guerrino or Guerin, considering that in these sagas the kingdom of Prester John is regarded as 
a solar center of Apollo's cult (the hero finds in it Apollo's priests); Apollo, as we may recall, is the 
Hyperborean god of light. 



48 



Frederick, Prester John, and the Tree of the Empire 



remain unknown, nor should it be confused with his own person or even at- 
tributed to him. Since he disobeys this law and reveals where he "has been" the 
law of time overtakes Ogier again; he suddenly ages and is about to die. At the 
last minute Morgan appears again and takes him back to Avalon, where he will 
be confined until for the seventh time Christendom will need him again. 10 

If we take all of this in consideration, it is very significant that in Wolfram 
von Eschenbach, Prester John is thought of as a descendant of the Grail dy- 
nasty; that in the Titurel, Percival himself assumes the function of Prester John; 
and that it is in the latter's country that the Grail eventually ends up in order 
to indicate time after time who must absolve the function of Prester John. 
In the German version of Ogier 's saga, Prester John and the Great Khan are 
presented as two companions of Ogier's, who create two powerful dynasties. 
These are various figurations of the inner unity of the same theme, variously 
expressed in the cycle of various legends that focus on this or that symbolic 
figure. 



10. The number seven plays an important part in every tradition with reference to cyclical 
developments. 



49 



12 

Dante: The Greyhound 
and the Dux 



To conclude this series of comparisons, I will remark that Dante's view of the 
"Greyhound" and of the Dux should be referred to a similar order of ideas. 

From an external point of view we cannot exclude that Dante chose the 
name "Greyhound" on the basis of the phonetic similarity between cane 
[Italian for "dog"] and Khan, the latter being the honorific title of the great 
leader of the Mongol Empire. As I have already indicated, at that time such an 
empire was sometimes confused with Prester John's, Alexander's, Ogier's — that 
is, with obscure representations of the Center of the World. At that time the 
Great Khan of the Tartars had not yet become the terror of Europe, but ac- 
cording to the descriptions of Marco Polo, of Haithon, of Mandeville, of 
Johannes de Piano Carpini, and so forth, he was conceived as the powerful em- 
peror of a mysterious, faraway, and huge empire, or as a wise and happy 
monarch, a friend of Christianity though a "pagan" himself. The verbal assim- 
ilation that leads from "Khan" to "Greyhound" is found as early as the German 
translation of Mandeville's text: "Heisset der grosse hundt, den man gewonlich 
nennt Can . . ♦ der Can ist der oberst und machtigst Keiser den die sunne uber- 
sccheinet" [The great dog is normally called Khan . . . the Khan is the greatest 
and most powerful emperor on whom the sun shines]. Boccaccio himself, 
though he rejected it, mentioned an interpretation of Dante's veltro [Italian for 
"greyhound"] in relation to the Great Khan. After all, in the ancient German 
language, huno meant "lord," "dominator " and this word appears in names of 
ancient German families, such as Huniger. 



50 



Dante: The Greyhound and the Dux 



This is not totally preposterous, and it is not as odd as it may first appear to 
be if we refer to what has been discussed to show that "the Great Khan" was a 
mere expression designating a function that was not contingent upon any par- 
ticular person or historical kingdom. In Dante, this function is evoked; in him 
it becomes a symbol and simultaneously a political faith and a hope. This will 
take us very close to what was the spirit animating and generating the Grail 
cycle. 

It is not necessary here to examine the symbolism of the Divine Comedy ac- 
cording to the various interpretations to which this work is susceptible, I will 
limit myself to pointing out that, generally speaking, Dante's otherworldly 
journey may be understood as the dramatized outline of a progressive purifi- 
cation and initiation. Moreover, such an adventure, as in the case of the Grail, 
has a close relationship with the Empire. We may recall that Dante got lost in a 
wild and dark forest, "the defile of which no living person had ever passed be- 
fore." 1 His references to "a stretch of desert" and to the "death he is struggling 
with, by that river over which the sea is powerless," 2 to his ascent of the "de- 
lightful mountain," and to "the top of the hill that I lost hope of reaching" 3 re- 
mind us of analogous situations incurred by the knights in search of the Grail. 
These knights have to cross powerful rivers and face mortal dangers in the 
"wild land" in order finally to climb the wild mountain Montsalvatsche, where 
the Castle of Joy is located. 

In Dante's Beatrice, and especially in the general symbolism of the Love's 
Lieges (an organization to which Dante belonged), we find again the theme of 
the supernatural woman; and in love, which motivates her to help Dante from 
heaven, we can detect a similarity with the theme of predestination or election. 
This kind of otherworldly help is very much needed if the knights are to find 
the Grail and successfully undergo a series of adventures and symbolic duels; 
incidentally, the latter express the same process of purification that in Dante's 
work took the form of a journey through hell and purgatory. Also, Dante's pu- 
rification process was less informed by the spirit of a heroic tradition than by 
the spirit of a theological- contemplative tradition. 

Going back to the initial episode, the direct ascent to the mountain was 
barred to Dante by a lion and a she-wolf, who have a visible correspondence in 
the symbols of a harlot "secure, like a city set on a hill," and of the giant em- 
bracing her, mentioned in the second part of the poem. The most current 



1. The Divine Comedy, trans. C. H. Sisson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980), Inferno, 1, 
26-27. 

2. Ibid., 1.29, 107-8. 

3. Ibid., 1.77, 54. 



51 



PRINCIPLES AND PRIOR EVENTS 



interpretation, according to which the she- wolf or the whore represents the 
Catholic Church, while the lion or the giant represents the House of France, 
seems to me to be the correct one; however, I think that those who from the 
historical and contingent reference (concerning the destruction of the Order of 
the Knights Templar) ascend to the corresponding principles go too far. The 
lion and the giant would then appear as the representations of the principle of 
a degraded, secular, and prevaricating royalty or of the unrestrained warrior 
principle, while the wolf and the whore allegedly are references to the corre- 
sponding involution or degradation of the principle of spiritual authority. 
Concerning this second point, however, Dante's view is limited by his Christian 
faith. When he accuses the Church (more or less like Luther, a few centuries 
later) he blames her for her corruption, namely, for her being mundane and for 
fostering political intrigues; he doesn't accuse her with the assumption that 
even if the Church had remained the pure and incorrupted representative of 
Christ's original teaching she would still have been an obstacle, since 
Christianity's essence would have amounted to a lunar spirituality (ascetic- 
contemplative at best), unfit to be the supreme reference point for an integral 
traditional restoration. 

In any event, Dante predicts the advent of one who will put an end to the 
double usurpation; this figure is the Greyhound, 4 who, according to the previ- 
ously mentioned convergence of symbols, is the same as the Dux, or "God's 
messenger" who "shall kill the whore together with the giant who shares her." 5 
The general symbol is that of an avenger and of a restorating agent; it is the 
image of the Universal Ruler mentioned in Dante's De monarchic and of a 
"restitution" based on the destruction of the two parallel principles of deca- 
dence, which is definitely reminiscent of the deeds of Parasu-Rama (see chap- 
ter 11); this is true regardless of the historical persons in whom Dante, 
following his hopes as a militant Ghibelline, thought he recognized that figure. 
To this we must add references pointing to other symbols that we have en- 
countered in the legends of the Great Khan, of Prester John, of the Ogier, and 
of Alexander, and in the imperial cycle in general, especially the Dry Tree, its 
new blossoming, and the eagle. 

In Dante the tree assumes the double meaning of Tree of Knowledge and 
"earthly paradise" (owing to its reference to Adam) and of Tree of the Empire 
(owing to its reference to the eagle); altogether it symbolizes the Empire, which 
justifies itself as a function of the primordial tradition. Dante's tree is first of all 



4. Ibid., Inferno 1.101-5. 

5. Ibid., Purgatory 33.43-45. In reference to the Greyhound, the defeat of the lion is secondary to 
the defeat of the she- wolf. 



52 



Dante: The Greyhound and the Dux 



the Arbre Sec or Durre Baum of the imperial cycle; a "defoliated tree" and a 
"widowed bough." It is said that "whoever robs the tree or snaps off pieces of- 
fends against God by a blasphemous act; it was created holy for his use." 6 
Concerning the development of Dante's view, leaving aside the elements that 
have a historical and contingent reference (the symbols of the various phases 
of the Church and of her relations with the Empire), note that Dante has the 
vision of the Flowering Tree immediately after enjoying the vision of the un- 
covered face of the supernatural woman, whom he significantly compares to 
the "splendor of the live eternal light" 7 

Moreover, while the vision of the Flowering Tree leads to the prophecy of 
the coming of the Dux, that is, of a new avenging manifestation of the 
Universal Ruler, at the same time the image of the primordial state, or of the 
earthly paradise, emerges, and it is said: "For a little while you shall dwell in 
these woods; and with me shall eternally be a citizen of that Rome of which 
Christ himself is a Roman " 8 This is, in other words, the effective participation 
in the metaphysical regnum, for which the Roman symbol is evoked, so that it 
may be superimposed over Christianity itself (the "Romanness" of Christ). 

Finally, this vision is followed by Dante's regeneration through the water of re- 
membering. This change opens to him the heavenly path, a path that leads to- 
ward purely metaphysical states of existence, a development to which the 
symbolism of blossoming (already applied to the "defoliated tree") is applied: "I 
came back from that most sacred of streams made afresh, as new trees are re- 
newed with their new foliage, and so was I clear and ready to go up to the stars." 9 

In Dante, the spiritual itinerary represented by the symbolism of the Divine 
Comedy ends up having a contemplative outlet, in conformity to Dante's dual- 
ism, according to which the Empire, with its inherent vita activa and in its very 
spirituality, represents a mere preparation for the vita contemplativa. Something 
like this will be seen in some forms of the Grail cycle, namely, in its latest versions, 
which, like the Italian legend of Guerrino, conclude with the main character's 
withdrawal to ascetic life. Yet in the Grail cycle, this appears in some kind of pes- 
simistic conclusion, the main forms of which witness a different spirit, a higher 
tension, a more unconditioned attitude, which is a sign of the influence of a more 
original tradition than that by which Dante's thought was influenced. 

Having gathered almost all the necessary references, let us proceed to con- 
sider the mystery of the Grail. 



6. Ibid., Purgatory 32.38, 50, 33.58-60. 

7. Ibid., 33.133-40. 

8. Ibid,, 32.100-103. 

9. Ibid., 33.142-45. 



53 



Part Three 



The Cycle of 
the Grail 



13 

The Sources of the Grail 



It has been correctly pointed out that from a historical point of view the most 
characteristic texts concerning the Grail suggest the existence of a hidden cur- 
rent that briefly surfaced at one particular point in time and then disappeared, 
almost as if in response to an obstacle or to a specific danger. 1 In fact, these 
texts crop up during a short time frame; apparently, none of them predates the 
last quarter of the twelfth century and none is later than the first quarter of the 
thirteenth century. This period also corresponds to the apogee of the medieval 
tradition, to the golden era of the Ghibelline movement, of knighthood, of the 
Crusades, and of the Knights Templar, and also of the synthesis attempted by 
Thomism, on the foundation of a pre-Christian and non-Christian legacy that 
was also assumed by the Arab civilization (alongside an analogous blooming of 
a knightly and mystical spirit), namely, Aristotelianism. 

The sudden popularity of the Grail romances was followed by a similarly 
strange oblivion. During the early years of the thirteenth century, almost as if 
obeying a password, Europe ceased writing about the Grail. A new revival oc- 
curred after a sensible interval, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, in 
altered and often stereotypical forms, which underwent a rapid decadence. The 
period of syncope of the first tradition of the Grail coincides with that of the 
greatest effort on the part of the Church to repress trends that she considered 
"heretical." The revival occurred some time after the destruction of the Order 
of the Knights Templar, which was followed, especially in Italy and in France 
and partially in England, by the organization in a more secret form of the 



1. J. L. Weston, The Quest of the Holy Grail (London, 1913). 



57 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



representatives of similar influences. These influences were not without 
relation to the same tradition of the Grail, and they perpetuated some of its 
aspects up to relatively recent times. 

The main sources of the Grail legend that I will use in my exposition are 
given here in an approximately chronological order: 

1. The cycle of Robert de Borron, which includes: 

a. Joseph ofArimathea 

b. Merlin 

c. Perlesvax (i.e., Percival) 

2. Chretien de Troyes's Conte du Graal (Story of the Grail), together 
with: 

a. A first continuation by Gautier de Doulens 

b. A second continuation by Manessier 

c. An interpolation by Gerbert de Monstreuil 

3. The so-called Grand Saint Graal 

4. The Perceval li Gallois> written in prose 

5. The Queste del Saint Graal which is the penultimate part of the 
work Lancelot, written in prose 

6. Wolfram von Eschenbach's Parzifal, which can be associated with 
Albert von Scharffenberg's Titurel and Wartburgkrieg 

7. Malory's Le Morte D* Arthur 

8. Heinrich von dem Turlin's Diu Crone 

These are the primary literary sources of#the Grail legend. Let us now briefly 
examine the inner sources of the tradition, according to some indications sup- 
plied by these texts. 

Let us note, first of all, the theme of Avalon, In Perceval li Gallois it is ex- 
plicitly said that the Latin book containing the story of the Grail was found on 
the island of Avalon, in a "sacred house atop adventurous lands" in which 
"Arthur and Guinevere are buried too." In one part of Robert de Borron's text, 
which is one of the oldest of the cycle, Avalon is described as a country located 
in the Far West, to which some of the knights of Joseph of Arimatheas host 
(such as Petrus and Alain) travel, obeying a divine injunction. It is written that 
Petrus must go "where his heart tells him to, M namely, to "Avalon's valleys," and 
remain there until the advent of one who will know how to read a divine letter 
and who will announce the power of the Grail. We already know that the 
Western Avalon is one and the same with the "White Island " According to 
Gautier, Joseph ofArimathea himself and the Grail travel to the "White Island," 
which owing to a transposition is conceived as a part of England; there, being 



58 



The Sources of the Grail 



attacked by enemies, he and his troops are "nourished" by the Grail itself, 
which gives to them whatever they wish. After all, according to others, Joseph 
of Arimathea himself is buried in the insula Avallonis, which is confused with 
Glastonbury for reasons I have already explained. 2 This island is a facsimile of 
the island to which many heroes of the Grail are taken; their adventures and 
most significant trials take place there. Moreover, this island takes up again the 
ancient Nordic-Celtic "polar" symbol of the primordial center whenever it is 
portrayed in the form of a rotating island. 

In reality, it is this center that is being discussed in this context This is the 
"promised land" of the Grail, conceived either as the place where the sources of 
the Grail are to be found, or as the land to which the Grail is taken, or as the 
place in which it is sought. The different travels attributed to it have a symbolic 
character and the meaning of a contact with forces or centers of the primordial 
tradition; this can be seen, for instance, in the fact that in the Grand Saint 
Graal, England, which is conceived as the Grail's "promised land" is reached by 
Joseph of Arimathea and his knights through supernatural means. They have 
to face the challenge of crossing the waters in a supernatural way; the pure and 
the elect will pass this test, while those who lack faith will drown. I have already 
discussed the meaning of this symbolism. 

The tradition related by Wolfram von Eschenbach leads to Avalon: in that 
tradition the founder of the dynasty of the future king of the Grail is Mazadan, 
who is led to Feimurgan by a supernatural woman named Ter-de-la-Schoye. 
Through a visible exchange of names, here we recognize the Morgan of the 
Arthurian cycle, who lives in the Land of Joy, one of the names given to the 
Western Island of the Celtic tradition, which sometimes ends up being applied 
to the kingdom of the Grail itself. The theme of a primordial tradition con- 
nected with Avalon, which needs to be resurrected in a heroic way, plays an im- 
portant part in the formulation of the legend by Robert de Borron: Percival 
eventually learns that the Rich Fisherman (a title that is often applied to Joseph 
of Arimathea himself) is his father; by divine order he "has traveled to the far 
Western lands, where the sun sets " and there he has been kept alive until Alain's 
son will perform deeds that will prove him to be the best knight in the world. 

The references to Joseph of Arimathea constitute the Christian, though not 
the Catholic and apostolic, component of the legend. Joseph is portrayed as a 
pagan "noble knight" who landed in Palestine; because of his seven years of 
faithful service as a warrior under Pontius Pilate, he obtained from the latter 



2. In many other tales, Joseph of Arimathea continues to remain as a sort of presence in the castle 
in which the adventures of the predestined heroes unfold; sometimes he assumes himself the traits 
of the wounded king. 



59 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



Jesus' body. Joseph was then believed to have filled a cup, which, according to 
some texts, was the Grail itself, with the blood flowing from the Nazarene's 
side. Having been imprisoned "in a house like a hollow pillar in the middle of 
a swamp," Joseph has an apparition of the Lord, who gives him the sacred cup; 
the cup gives him life and light until he is finally released, according to some 
texts, forty years later. 3 All these events took place while Joseph was still a 
pagan. Then Joseph was baptized and anointed by the Lord as the first 
Christian bishop with an oil that is used in both a regal and a priestly conse- 
cration. In fact, later on, this oil will consecrate the entire dynasty of Britain's 
kings, up to Uther Pendragon, King Arthur's father. Before traveling to England 
(a land that acquired the meaning of "White Island") in the miraculous way 
previously mentioned, Joseph and his peers undergo various symbolic adven- 
tures (more on which later) in which the theme of the island appears again. In 
Perceval li Gallois we find the important reference that already prior to Jesus' 
death, Joseph had visited the island to which Percival himself will travel: more- 
over, Robert de Borron mentions the mysterious ancestors of Joseph, whom 
one must serve as a condition for being admitted into the order. This order al- 
legedly existed prior to Jesus' time and to the advent of Christianity, 

If one wanted to give a sui generis historical content to these aspects of the 
saga, it may be formulated along the following lines: some Christian elements 
find their way into the Nordic-Celtic area and reawaken the tradition of 
Avalon. According to these traditions, Britannia, which is associated with 
memories of the White Island, and later on with King Arthur's kingdom, is the 
Grail's promised land, or the place where the Grail is eminently manifested. 
Moreover, an English center (Glastonbury and even Salisbury), again confused 
with Avalon or with equivalent symbolic places, preserves the "sources" of the 
Grail's story. The reference according to which the Grail fed the knights who 
traveled to Avalon and who fell into a state of indigence may allude to a period 
of decadence of the visible forms of the ancient Nordic tradition. This tradi- 
tion, as a Grail tradition, was destined to awaken to new life as a result of the 
contact with the Christian religion, which had reached northern Europe. This 
may be reconnected with the theme of the spells from which the Grail was sup- 
posed to liberate England and, according to some, the entire world; with the 
theme of Arthur's court, which had undergone a period of decadence because 
of the Dolorous Stroke; and also with the need on the part of the Knights of 
the Round Table to participate in an adventure unknown to the most ancient 
texts of the Nordic-Celtic tradition, namely, the quest for the Grail. 



3. The numbers seven and forty have an esoteric character and have also been referred to inner 
processes of development and purification. 



60 



The Sources of the Grail 



In its Christianized form, this quest is also unknown to the early texts of or- 
thodox Christianity; moreover, the tradition of the Grail has ostensibly little in 
common with the apostolic-Roman tradition. Concerning the second point, we 
have already seen that the forefather of the Grail's regality, Joseph of Arimathea, 
receives the investiture directly from Christ. The former's dynasty, which is essen- 
tially regal, does not have a relation with the Church of Rome, but rather leads di- 
rectly to the Nordic kingdom of King Arthur. In one of its ramifications, according 
to Wolfram von Eschenbach, that kingdom converges into the symbolic kingdom 
of Prester John, who is "king of kings." Concerning the first point, while the eccle- 
siastical literature already knew the figure of Joseph of Arimathea and his impris- 
onment, 4 it was silent about the Grail; nor do we find ancient Briton texts (with 
one exception, which seems to be a case of interpolation) in which Joseph appears 
as a Christian missionary to England. The chronicler Helinand, who first related 
the story of the Grail and mentioned the figure of Joseph of Arimathea, wrote: 

Gradalis autem vel gradale dicitur Gallice scutella lata et aliquantulum 
profunda in qua preciosae dapes, cum suo jure divitibus solent apponi, et 
dicitur nomine Graal .... Hanc historiam latine scriptam invenire non 
potui, sed tantum Gallice scripta habentur a quibusdam proceribus, nee 
facile, ut aiunt, tota inveniri potest. 

[Daylight, however, was called by the Galls a wide plate that holds a holy 
feast. At this feast you are to be served good fortune, and it is called by the 

name of Grail This is the history as it is written in Latin (that is, in the 

writings of the church). It was not discovered, but was held in all the Gallic 
scripts by certain princes.] 

In 1260 Jakob van Maerlant declared the story of the Grail to be a fake, on the 
basis that up to that time the Church knew nothing about it, or better, did not 
want to hear about it. 5 



4. See GestaPilati 12, 14. 

5. E. Wechssler in his Die Sage vom heiligen Gral in ihrer Entwicklung (Halle, 1898) wrote: "Despite 
its markedly religious character, the legend of the Grail was never acknowledged by the Church and 
the clergy. No ecclesiastical writer talks about the Grail. In the very abundant ecclesiastical litera- 
ture that we have today, nowhere do we find mention of the Grail, with the exception of the chron- 
icler Helinand. Yet the ecclesiastical authors could not but have known the wonderful story of the 
symbol of the faith. It is likely that they built around the legend a conspiracy of silence." 

J. Marx in his Legende arthurienne remarks: "The Church never claimed for herself the adven- 
ture of the Grail. It seems that in it she sensed something predating her, something primordial and 
mysterious." 



61 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



If in some texts Joseph's cup is identified with the cup used during the Last 
Supper, we do not find references to such an association in the Christian tra- 
dition. On the other hand, even when in later and more Christianized texts the 
Grail assumes an analogous function to that played by the eucharistic cup in 
the mystery of the Mass, Robert de Borron s aversion to talk about the nature 
of the Grail and the mention of secret words that no one is supposed to repeat 
and that were allegedly entrusted only to Joseph of Arimathea suggest that this 
is a different mystery from that celebrated in the Catholic rite. In any event, this 
rite seems to have been officiated by people other than regular clergy, with a 
symbolism and an esotericism totally foreign to Christianity. And when some 
texts identify the Grail as Jesus' cup at the Last Supper and the spear as the 
weapon that pierced Jesus' side at his crucifixion, those who follow the inner 
logic and grasp the overall picture cannot but wonder if here is something 
more than images of the predominant religious conscience, borrowed as in- 
struments for the expression of a different content. The facts that such a con- 
tent originates from traditions extraneous to Christianity and that it reflects a 
climate that can hardly be reduced to Christian religiosity can be seen rather 
clearly by those who consider the legends of the Grail in their entirety. 

Wolfram von Eschenbach attributes the sources of his story to a certain 
<c Kyot the Provencal " who in turn allegedly found the legends of Percival and 
the Grail in pagan texts he decoded thanks to his knowledge of magical char- 
acters. In very ancient times, Flegatanis, of Solomon's stock, had written the 
story of the Grail found in these texts on the basis of his knowledge of astrol- 
ogy, having read the name of the Grail in the stars. "By examining the stars he 
discovered deep secrets about which he talked only with shivers and great fear.'' 

Thus the story of the Grail generally presents supernatural, secret, and ini- 
tiatory characters. Robert de Borron attributes its true sources to a "great 
book" that he was never able to read, "in which the great mysteries of the so- 
called Grail are inscribed"; in the Perceval li Gallois it is also written; "This story 
must be held in high esteem and never told to people who would not under- 
stand it, since evil men will never understand a good thing when they see one." 
Robert de Borron adds: "The great story of the Grail was never started by a 
mortal man" (unque retreite este rfavoit — la grant estoire dou Graal — par nul 
homme qui fust mortal). According to him, the metamorphoses that occur in 
the vision of the Grail cannot be expressed, "since the secrets of the sacrament 
must be revealed only to him whom God has given the grace of being worthy 
of it." Vauchier says that it is dangerous to talk about the Grail other than at the 
right time and place, and that "one cannot talk about the mystery of the Grail 
without trembling and changing complexion." 6 The so-called Elucidation that 



6. Weston, Holy Grail, 8-10. 



62 



The Sources of the Grail 



precedes the text of Chretien de Troyes mentions a certain Master Blihis, who 
was in charge of a tradition that must remain secret: "Car, se Maistre Blihis ne 
ment, nus ne doit dire le secree." 

The most recent and Christianized text of the first period, the Grand Saint 
Graal, substituted the original secret and mysterious character surrounding the 
Grail with a more mystical one: the book of the Grail was written by Christ 
himself and transmitted to the author during a vision. One can approach it 
only after an ascetic and purifying preparation. When reading it, apparitions 
are experienced, and one's spirit is taken by angels to contemplate directly the 
mystery of the Trinity. To open the casket that contains the Grail means to 
enter into direct contact with Christ himself. However, even in the case of the 
blinding or combustion that this text says will plague those who want to get too 
close to the Grail, we find the permanence of the ancient and more original 
meaning of a mysterium tremendum that has little in common with the 
Christian pathos. 



63 



14 

The Virtues of the Grail 



In the various texts, the Grail is essentially portrayed under three forms; 

1. As an immaterial, self-moving object, of an indefinite and enig- 
matic nature ("it was not made of wood, nor of some metal, nor 
of stone, horn, or bone"). 

2. As a stone — a "heavenly stone" and a "stone of light." 

3. As a cup, bowl or tray, often of gold and sometimes adorned with 
precious stones. Both in this form and in the previous one, we 
almost always find women carrying the Grail (another element 
totally extraneous to any Christian ritual, since no priests appear 
in it). 

A mixed form is that of a cup carved out of a stone (sometimes of an emer- 
ald). The Grail is sometimes qualified as "holy" sometimes as "rich"; "this is the 
richest thing that any man hath living." 1 This text, like many others of the same 
period, uses the expression "Sangreal ," which is susceptible to three interpreta- 
tions: Holy Grail, Royal Blood, and Regal Blood. 

The main virtues of the Grail may be summed up as follows: 
1. Virtue of Light, that is, an enlightening virtue. The Grail radiates a super- 
natural light. In the words of Chretien de Troyes: "Une si grans clartes i vint — 
que si pierdirent les candoiles — los clarte, com font les estoiles — quand si solau 



1 . Le Morte D'Arthur, 1 1 .2. 



64 



The Virtues of the Grail 



lieve ou la lune." ["Such a great brightness shone forth that the light of the can- 
dles was lost in it just as that of the stars is dimmed by the rising sun or 
moon"] Robert de Borron describes the appearance of the Grail in the prison 
of Joseph of Arimathea as that of a great light, adding that "as soon as Joseph 
saw the bowl, he was entirely filled with the Holy Spirit." In Vaucher, the Fisher 
King, who carries the Grail with him at night, lights his path with it. Talking 
about its appearance to Joseph, the Grand Saint Graal says that out of it "came 
such a light, as if from a thousand candles" and mentions being taken beyond 
time: the forty-two years that Joseph spent in jail seemed to him as three days. 
In Gautier, Percival follows a maiden into a dark forest despite her protesta- 
tions; immediately a great light appears, the maiden disappears, and a great 
storm breaks out. The following day Percival learns that the light came from 
the Grail, as it was carried about the forest by the Fisher King. 

In Wolfram the Grail is a "stone of light": "The Grail is a perfect fulfillment of 
every desire and true paradise; it is a stone of light before which any human 
splendor pales." In the Queste du Graal, Galahad, upon seeing the Grail, shivers 
and says: "Now I can clearly see what a tongue could never express and the heart 
fail to realize. Here I see the beginning of all great deeds and the reason behind 
courageous feats; behold, the wonder of wonders." In Le Movie D 'Arthur the 
manifestation of the Grail is accompanied by the sound of thunder and by a "ray 
of sun seven times brighter than the light of day"; at that time "they were all en- 
lightened by the grace of the Holy Spirit." In that occasion the Grail appears in an 
enigmatic form, and "there was none might see it, nor who bare it," "and every 
knight had such meats and drinks as he loved best in this world." 2 

2. This corresponds to the second virtue of the Grail. Besides being light and 
an enlightening supernatural power, it gives nourishment and "life." In 
Wolfram, all the Knights Templar receive nourishment from the Grail, which is 
conceived as a "stone" (lapsit exillis): "sie lebent von einem steine." When it is 
taken to the dining table, or at its magical appearance, every knight receives 
what he wishes for the most. In this context, mention of various physical foods 
that correspond to different tastes is the materialization of the superior mean- 
ing of the various effects of the same gift of "life" according to the will, the vo- 
cation, the nature, or the qualifications of those who receive it. This 
nourishment eventually destroys every material craving; thus in the Perceval It 
Gallois, in virtue of the fragrance emanating from the Grail, the guests even 
forget to eat and Gawain, during an ecstatic trance, achieves the vision of 
angels. 

2. Ibid, 13.7. 



65 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



In the Grand Saint Graal the Grail reproduces the miracle of the multipli- 
cation of the loaves of bread. In the Queste du Graal, in which its apparition is 
preceded by "a light as bright as the sun" the Grail moves around in a magical 
fashion; after giving to each his own food, it disappears, just as in the previously 
mentioned account of Le Morte D y Arthur. In particular, the strong and the he- 
roes love the food supplied by the Grail; Robert de Borron gives the following 
etymology: "It is called Grail because the brave like it (agree asprodes homes)" 
We have already seen that Joseph of Arimathea himself, together with his 
knights, received not only light but also life (nourishment) from the Grail dur- 
ing the entire forty years of his imprisonment, which was inflicted on him by 
King Crudel. 

3. The Grail's gift of life manifests itself even in its power of healing mortal 
wounds and of super naturally renewing and prolonging life. In Manessier, as 
Percival and Ector fight each other, they are both mortally wounded and await 
their death, when at midnight, the Grail, carried by an angel with "imperial" 
looks, makes his appearance and heals both of them instantaneously and en- 
tirely; 3 the same episode is also found in Le Morte D 'Arthur. In the Queste du 
Graal mention is made of a suffering knight lying in a coffin, who drags him- 
self to the Grail and by touching it feels rejuvenated, falling out of pain into a 
deep sleep. In this case we have also the interference of a further motive, 
namely, that of the kings who, as they await a predestined avenger or restorer, 
are artificially kept alive by the Grail. 

Wolfram, by relating that in virtue of the Grail "the phoenix is consumed 
and turned into ashes, but it is also transformed, appearing again in all its 
splendor, more beautiful than ever" clearly establishes a relationship between 
the Grail's gift of life and the regeneration of which the phoenix was tradition- 
ally a symbol. Wolfram says that "this stone [i.e., the Grail] infuses in man such 
a vigor that his flesh and bones are instantly rejuvenated" Thus the Grail not 
only enlightens but also renews; yet it refuses its symbolic nourishment or gift 
of life to those who are guilty of serious offenses, namely, to cowards and to 
liars. 

4. The Grail induces a power of victory and domination. Those who use it 
n'en court de bataille venchu. According to Robert de Borron, all those who get 
a glimpse of it, besides rejoicing with eternal joy, will never be deprived of their 
right or defeated in battle. In the Lorengel the Grail appears as a "stone of vic- 
tory" with which Percival pushes back Attila and his hordes of Huns at the mo- 



3. To a careful reader, the fact that according to this text the vision occurs at midnight is not de- 
void of an esoteric meaning (i.e., the midnight sun). 



66 



The Virtues of the Grail 



ment in which they are about to overcome Christianity. Wolfram says about 
him who passes the test of the Grail: "At this point there is no one in the whole 
wide world who can excel you in nobility and honor. You are the lord of all 
creatures. Supreme power will be given unto you." The aspect of the Grail ac- 
cording to which it bestows the power of victory will be emphasized in relation 
to the "sword of the Grail " What is already foreshadowed in this text by 
Wolfram, however, is the highest essence of the Grail, or the relation it has with 
a transcendent regality, with the principle of the Universal Ruler. Moreover, we 
will see that the Grail itself, like an oracle, designates the knights who are called 
to become kings in various lands. Some have rightly compared the Grail to the 
object that symbolizes and embodies the heavenly power of regality according 
to the Iranian tradition (the hvareno) and that assumes the various aspects of 
magical stone, stone of kingship and victory, or cup; these are all aspects that 
are also found in the Grail 

5. If, on the one hand, the Grail has a vivifying virtue, on the other hand it 
has a dreadful and destroying virtue. The Grail blinds, incinerates, and may 
even act as a sort of vortex. Nescien recognizes in the Grail the object of his de- 
sires when he is still a young knight, but as soon as he opens its case, he trem- 
bles and loses his sight and control over his own body. The Queste du Graal 
adds that Mordrain, with a similar act, had attempted to contemplate what no 
tongue can express. His attempt unleashes a supernatural wind that blinds 
him; he is condemned to remain alive until the arrival of the hero who will re- 
alize the mystery of the Grail and heal him. The theme is not new. Dante him- 
self, while contemplating the empyrean, loses his sight, even though he gains it 
back and improved at a later time. 4 The deeds of the Persian hero Rostan aim 
at restoring the sight and the freedom of a king whose Promethean inclination 
is evident by the latter's attempt to reach heaven with the help of eagles. 

Other examples may be easily adduced. According to Gerbert's story, 
Mordrain, who has built an altar for the Grail, finds its access barred by an 
angel with a fiery sword (in an analogous episode in the Bible, the entrance to 
the primordial location is guarded by an angel; compare also the wall of fire 
that in some texts surrounds the island, etc.). The angel, as a punishment for 
his attempt, tells him that he will not be able to die and that his wounds will 
remain open until the coming of the knight who "will ask the proper question." 
In the Din Crone, to pursue the Grail is said to be a "mortally dangerous thing " 
And yet, in Le Morte D 'Arthur, it is to the same close view of the Grail that 



4. Divine Comedy, Paradise, 30. 



67 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



caused Mordrain s and Nesciens downfall that Gawain aspires; he leaves in 
quest of adventures, vowing not to return until he finds the Grail, 5 

Moreover, the dangerous nature of the Grail can be seen in relation to the 
theme of the Siege Perilous and to the test it constitutes for those who want to 
assume the role of the "awaited hero" and supreme leader of the Knights of the 
Round Table. This is the "empty chair" or "thirteenth chair" or "polar seat" that 
I have previously discussed; every time a nonchosen or unworthy person takes 
this seat, either an abyss opens up underneath him or he is stricken by a thun- 
derbolt. Thus when the disciple Moses sits at the table of Joseph of Arimathea 
(which is not to be confused with the Round Table), he is grabbed by seven 
fiery hands and destroyed "just as a fire incinerates a piece of wood " 6 Later on, 
the text describes this event in the following terms: half of the fire that con- 
sumes Moses is put out, but the other half will keep on burning until Galahad 
comes to bring the adventure of the Grail to a successful end. A variation is the 
"test of the vessel"; the only ones who enjoy the ecstasy of the Grail are those 
who, sitting at the table of Joseph of Arimathea, are not stained with any of- 
fense. On this occasion, Moses, after taking a seat analogous to the Siege 
Perilous, is swallowed up into an abyss that opens underneath his feet; accord- 
ing to a Christian explanation, this happens because of his lack of faith, he 
being a false disciple. 

We also encounter another theme, according to which the only person who 
can successfully seek the Grail is the one who will sit in the golden seat repre- 
sented by the supernatural woman. Six knights who have attempted to sit in it 
have suddenly fallen into an abyss; when Percival sits in it, a terrible thunder 
resounds and the earth opens up, yet he remains sitting calmly at his place. 
Impassible, clothed in his calm dignity and in the purity of his strength, noth- 
ing can overcome him. In Robert de Borron, after this test, another series of ad- 
ventures must be undertaken by Percival and all the Knights of the Round 
Table; these adventures eventually lead to the definite conquest of the Grail. 
The Queste du Graal and Le Morte D' Arthur present the theme in an even more 
direct form: the dangerous seat is successfully occupied only by he who has 
passed the "test of the sword " which consists in drawing a sword out of a stone, 
thereby demonstrating himself to be the best among all knights. After this test 
(the meaning of which I have already explained) is successfully completed, the 



5. Le Morte D y Arthur, 3.6. 

6. Here we find again the traditional number seven, which reminds us of the particular effects of 
an awakened force (kundalini) on seven centers of life, mentioned in esoteric teachings. See my 
Yoga of Power. 



6S 



The Virtues of the Grail 



Grail appears at Arthur's court; a light brighter than the sun shines forth and 
the Grail magically appears, emanating its fragrance and giving to each knight 
his own nourishment. 7 

This dangerous aspect of the Grail should be considered as a limit case of 
what the Grail can do, depending on the nature of those who come in contact 
with it. The power of the Grail destroys all those who try to hold it without 
having the proper qualifications, or who attempt to usurp it by repeating the 
Titanic, Luciferian, or Promethean deed. A significant expression is found, in 
this regard, in Wolfram, when he says figuratively that to those who are guilty, 
the Grail is so heavy that they could not hold it up even if they all tried to at 
the same time. What causes the power of life to act as a destructive force (e.g., 
the fire that consumes Moses) is the very excess that the transcendent power 
constitutes for a conditioned being who is tied to his own limitations. 

A variation of this meaning is found in Le Morte D y Arthur in the following 
form: When perceiving the great brightness caused by the Grail, "as if all the 
torches of the world were gathered in that hall," Lancelot steps forward. A voice 
warns him not to enter, but to run away; otherwise he will regret it. He disobeys 
and goes in anyway When a fire strikes him in the face, he falls to the ground 
and cannot get up, having lost control of his limbs. To his peers, who think he 
has died, an old man says, "In God's name, he is not dead, but has more life in 
him than the strongest among you." Lancelot remains in this state of apparent 
death for twenty-four days, and then the first words he utters are: "Why have 
you awakened me? For I was more at ease than I am now." This experience is 
attributed to his having seen the Sangreal like no one else before. 8 Obviously 
this was an initiatory state, or a state in which the participation in the power of 
the Grail is made possible by the suspension of the waking consciousness and 
of the individual limitation relative to it. This avoids the negative, destructive, 
and overpowering effect that the experience of the contact has in those who are 
not able to shift to higher forms of consciousness or other states of being. 

6. The double virtue of the Grail is somewhat related to the meaning that 
the dyad cup-lance has, in general, in the concordant traditions of various peo- 
ple, and even outside any relation with Christian symbolism. The cup corre- 
sponds to the feminine, vivifying, and enlightening aspect, and the lance to the 
virile, fiery, or regal (i.e., the scepter) aspect of the same principle. Or better, 
the former corresponds to the lunar tree and the latter to the solar tree. Again, 
the former corresponds to the holy wisdom and the latter to the dimension of 



7. le Morte D'Arthur, 13.4-6. 

8. Le Morte D'Arthur, 17.15. 



69 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



fire and denomination of the same principle. In the same context, however, we 
could insert the ambivalence of the lance itself, which is taken from the Irish 
tradition and which on the one hand inflicts the coup douloureuxby causing a 
destruction, while on the other hand it has the power to heal. 

This brief overview of the virtues attributed to the Grail sheds light on the 
subjective side of its quest. This quest is essentially an inner event. As an expe- 
rience it does not amount to some mere mystical ecstasy: it is rather a primor- 
dial power that is positively evoked. Those who know how to assume it are 
qualified for the other tasks mentioned in the legend, which indeed constitute 
its central nucleus. 

I wish now to discuss those episodes in which the Grail appears as a stone, 
and also to emphasize the particular meaning that emerges in the tradition 
portraying the Grail as a stone fallen from heaven and particularly as a 
"Luciferian" stone. 

Wolfram von Eschenbach connects to the Grail the enigmatic term lapsit ex- 
illis. This term has been interpreted by scholars in various ways: lapis erilis, or 
"Lord's stone" (San Marte); lapis elixity in reference to the alchemical elixir of 
regeneration (Palgen); lapis betillis or betillus (Hagen), which may be a refer- 
ence to baitulos, the stone fallen from the sky according to Greek mythology; 
lapis ex coelis or de coelis, a "heavenly stone" (Martin); and finally, lapis exiliis, 
or "stone of the exile." In reality, no matter how accurate these conjectural in- 
terpretations are from a purely etymological point of view, the Grail is suscep- 
tible to all of these meanings, according to its various aspects. 

The Grail is first of all a lapis ex coelis because, according to Wolfram, it was 
originally brought down to earth by a hdst of angels. In this tradition, also re- 
ferred to in the Titurel by Albrecht von Scharffenberg, the Grail appears as a 
stone, a jasper or silica, and is connected to the symbol of the phoenix. 
According to Wolfram, these were the angels who were condemned to descend 
to earth for having remained neutral when Lucifer rebelled against God. The 
Grail was guarded by them and did not lose its qualities; later on it was en- 
trusted to a stock of knights, who were appointed from above. This tradition 
was modified in the Wartburgkrieg in the following way: a stone fell off 
Lucifer's crown when the latter was stricken by the archangel Michael. This is 
the stone of the elect, which fell from heaven to earth, which Percival found 
again, and which was previously picked up by Titurel, who is the founder of the 
Grail dynasty; thus the Grail allegedly is this Luciferian stone. 9 



9. In some manuscripts of this text the stone was found by Percival, while in others it is Percival 
himself: an interesting identification indeed. 



70 



The Virtues of the Grail 



According to others, the stone that fell to earth was an emerald that adorned 
Lucifer's forehead. It was cut into the shape of a bowl by a faithful angel, and 
thus the Grail was born. It was given to Adam before he was expelled from the 
Garden of Eden. Seth, Adam's son, having temporarily returned to the earthly 
paradise, took the Grail along with him. 10 Other people transported the Grail 
to Montsegur, a fortress in the Pyrenees, which Lucifer's armies besieged in 
order to get the Grail back and put it into their leader's crown, out of which it 
had fallen; but the Grail was allegedly saved by knights who hid it within a 
mountain. 



10, See Rene Guenon, Le Roi du monde, chapter 5. This may recall the Arab saga concerning the 
black stone of Kaaba, given by Gabriel to Adam; this stone, which was taken back to heaven after 
the flood, was subsequently returned to earth by Gabriel, that it might become the foundation 
stone of the Islamic tradition. After the original sin, this white, shiny stone turned black. 
Concerning this last interpretation, it probably needs to be rectified in the sense that the color 
black designates what is occult, unmanifested, as is the Supreme Center during the decline of every 
traditional civilization. 



71 



15 

The Luciferian Stone 



In these legends, no matter how free of religious overtones, we find again the 
connection of the Grail, conceived as a heavenly stone, with a mysterious legacy 
and power associated with a primordial state that was somehow preserved dur- 
ing a period of exile. The reference to Lucifer, beyond a Christian and theistic 
context, may be seen as a variation on the theme of an aborted or deviated at- 
tempt at a heroic reattainment of this state. The theme of the host of angels de- 
scending from heaven with the Grail resembles the theme of the race of the 
Tuatha de Danaan, which was believed to be composed of divine beings. This 
race came to Ireland from heaven, carrying a supernatural stone (the stone of 
the legitimate kings) and other objects that, as we have noted, correspond ex- 
actly to those of the cycle of the Grail: a sword, a lance, a bowl that feeds peo- 
ple without ever being depleted. At the same time, the homeland of the Tuatha 
was that Avalon which, according to a noted tradition, is also the seat of the 
books of the Grail and which has often been confused, owing to obscure asso- 
ciations, with the place in which the Grail was eminently revealed. 

There is more. In some Celtic legends, the fallen angels are identified with 
the Tuatha de Danaan; in other legends mention is made of spirits who, as a 
punishment for their neutrality, were forced to descend on earth. They are de- 
scribed as the inhabitants of a Western-Atlantic region, which was visited by 
Saint Brendan. This region is a facsimile of Avalon, just as the journey is a 
Christianized image of the journey undertaken by various Celtic heroes to 
reach the "Island" the original homeland and inviolable center of the Tuatha. 
Thus we have a curious interference of motifs that finds an expression, for in- 
stance, in the Leabhar na h-uidhre, in that it is written that the Tuatha are "gods 



72 



The Luciferian Stone 



who begat wise men. It is likely that they arrived in Ireland from heaven, which 
explains the superiority of their science and of their knowledge." 

A careful separation of themes may here differentiate that which refers to 
authentically Luciferian elements (to which we may correctly apply the idea of 
a "fall" and of life on earth as a punishment) from that which (through a ten- 
dentiously deformed representation) refers to earthly custodians of the power 
from above and of the tradition symbolized by the Grail as a persistent, unal- 
tered, secret presence of that which was proper to the primordial and divine 
state. The neutrality of the Grail's angels (mentioned in Wolfram) is reminis- 
cent of a state ideally prior to that differentiation of spirituality which the 
Luciferian theme characterizes. And if Wolfram later on presents a different 
version, making Trevrizent say that the neutral angels did not return to heaven 
(unlike the Tuatha, who returned to Avalon) but were responsible for their 
eternal downfall and that "those who want to be rewarded by God should not 
become an enemy of these fallen angels ," we must remember how Christianity 
deformed prior traditions, substituting their original meaning with totally dif- 
ferent interpretations. 

Generally speaking, owing to its prevalently "lunar" view of the sacred, 
Christianity has often stigmatized as Luciferian and diabolical not only that 
which is truly such, but also any attempt at heroic reintegration and any spiri- 
tuality that does not foster a relationship of devotion and of creaturely depen- 
dence on the divine, theistically conceived. Thus we often come across mixtures 
of motifs analogous to that of the Tuatha de Danaan in certain Siriac-Hebrew 
literature, in which the fallen angels eventually become one and the same with 
"those who are awake" (the eypriyopoi). 1 Tertullian did not hesitate to at- 
tribute to the fallen angels the body of magico-hermetic doctrines, 2 namely, 
those doctrines that helped Flegetanis penetrate the original texts of the Grail 
and that Le Morte D' 'Arthur attributed to Solomon, conceived as a forefather of 
the heroes of the Grail, in the same terms as Tertullian's: "This Solomon was 
wise and knew all the virtues of stones and trees, and so he knew the course of 
the stars and many other diverse things." 3 When Innocent III accused the 
Knights Templar of "following doctrines of demons" (utentes doctrinis dae- 
monorum), he no doubt had in mind the anti-Christolatric mysteries of the 
Knights Templar; this pope instinctively proceeded to the same assimilation, 



1. Julius Evola, The Hermetic Tradition, trans. E. E. Rehmus (Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions, 1995), 
2-12. 

2. De cultu feminarum> 1.2b. 

3. Le Morte D 'Arthur, 17.5. 



73 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



through which the primordial "divine race" was represented as the guilty or 
Luciferian race of the fallen angels. 

I believe I have already supplied sufficiently precise reference points to help 
the readers orient themselves before similar distortions and establish both the 
limit that separates the Luciferian spirit from that which is not and the 
Christian perspective from the point of view of a higher spirituality. Thus it 
will be easy to distinguish the individual elements that we encounter in the 
Grail cycle, which were mixed with many interpolations and deformations. 
Having showed that the titanic element is indeed the prime matter out of 
which the hero is made, it is understandable that Wolfram bestows upon 
Percival some Luciferian traits, though he makes him successfully complete his 
adventure, so much so that in the end Percival assumes the luminous form of 
a restorator and of a king of the Grail. In fact, Percival accuses God of having 
betrayed him, of not being faithful to him, and of having failed to assist him in 
the conquest of the Grail. He rebels and in his anger he says: 

I used to serve a being called God before I was ridiculed and covered with 

shame I was His humble servant because I believed He would grant me 

His favor: but from now on I will refuse to serve Him. If He persecutes me 
with His hatred, I will resign myself to that too. Friend [he says to 
Gawain], when the time for you to fight has come, may the thought of a 
woman [rather than of God] protect you. 

Animated by such indignation and pride, Percival, after failing in his first 
visit to the castle, fulfills his adventures.^And thus, being separated from God, 
avoiding churches and performing "wild" knightly deeds (wilden Aventure; 
wilden, ferren Ritterschaft) he eventually triumphs, achieving the glory of the 
king of the Grail. Trevrizent will tell him, "Rarely was a greater miracle seen: by 
showing your anger you have received from God what you desired the most " 
Also in Wolfram, Percival appears as the one who reaches the castle of the Grail 
in an exceptional way, without having been designated or called like others be- 
fore him. His election occurs later on; in a way, it is the very adventures of 
Percival that bring his election about and almost bestow it upon him. 
Trevrizent says, "It never happened before that the Grail could be achieved by 
fighting." This trait too helps us recognize the heroic type, the one who, not by 
nature (as in the case of the Olympian type, to whom the legitimate king of the 
Grail may correspond, prior to his getting old, wounded, or falling asleep), but 
because of the reawakening of a deeper vocation and thanks to his action, suc- 
cessfully participates in what the Grail symbolizes. This character reaches such 
heights as to become a knight of the Grail and finally achieves the supreme dig- 
nity of the Order of the Grail. 



74 



16 

The Test of Pride 



In Wolfram these meanings are detailed and confirmed in relation to Gawain 
and Amfortas. In Wolfram, Trevrizent is the brother of the fallen king of the 
Grail, who withdrew to ascetic life by the Wild Fountain (Fontane la 
Salvatsche), trying to alleviate, through his asceticism, the sufferings of his 
brother and also to stem the decay of the Grail's kingdom. His own name may 
be translated as "recent truce," which suggests a provisional solution based on 
the ascetic principle as people await a true restoration. Trevrizent does not fail 
to remind Percival of the fate of Lucifer and his hosts after the latter decides to 
proceed in his adventure without the help of God. At the same time, however, 
Trevrizent indicates to him the true limit and the true cause of Lucifer's fall: if, 
on the one hand, in order to have the right to look after the Grail it is neces- 
sary to demonstrate an exceptional strength and bravery, on the other hand it 
is also necessary "to be free of pride." Trevrizent tells Percival, "Perhaps your 
youth will cause you to show a lack of the virtue of renunciation " and he re- 
minds Percival of Amfortas's situation, "the misery tormenting him, which was 
the 'reward' of his pride." And because "in his quest of love he did not respect 
chastity, Amfortas was stricken by evil, which eventually plagued all those 
around him " 

Wolfram has portrayed in Amfortas the type of the wounded king who 
awaits the hero who will heal him and to whom he will transmit the mandate 
of the Grail's kingship. Amfortas's fall is explained in the following way: choos- 
ing as his battle cry "Amor, which does not become humility" he puts himself 
at the service of Orgeluse de Logrois, performing brave deeds "characterized by 
the yearning for love." In one of these adventures, however, he ends up being 
wounded in his manhood by a poisoned lance (mit einem geluppeten sper — 

75 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



wart er ze tjostieren wunt) thrust by a pagan knight who was certain of being 
able to conquer the Grail. His opponent is eventually slain, but Amfortas's 
wound remains and his strength disappears. He can no longer adequately func- 
tion as the king of the Grail, and therefore the whole kingdom falls into a deep 
state of prostration and desolation, 

Behind the erotic symbolism of this episode it is relatively easy to recognize 
the allusion to a Luciferian deviation, that is, to an affirmation or action guided 
not by a transfiguring orientation but by craving and pride. Ordinary chastity 
is not the Grail's law; in Wolfram, the Grail's kings are allowed to have a 
woman, designated by the Grail itself. In other texts the Grail's knights accept 
the sexual favors of the woman of the castle, and some even go as far as raping 
her; 1 yet these men are not allowed to devote themselves to or marry that 
woman who is a symbol of pride, whose name is Orgeluse ("the Proud One"). 
This already amounts to wounding and poisoning heroic virility, sentencing it 
to a restless and unextinguishable love, which somehow has the same meaning 
as Prometheus' punishment. 2 

Such is the meaning of Amfortas's wound, which is synonymous with his 
own downfall. Thus one can understand why Trevrizent mentions Amfortas 
immediately after warning Percival by reminding him of Lucifer's fall. 

Interestingly enough, Wolfram also mentions another knight who under- 
takes the same adventure as Amfortas's, though with a different outcome, 
namely, Gawain. Gawain listened to PercivaPs advice to entrust himself to a 
woman rather than to God. In Oblilote he finds a woman who "will protect 
him in every difficult adventure," or one "who will be his escort and follower," 
or "a roof that will protect him during *storms and times of calamities." This 
woman says: 



1. J. Marx (Legende arthurienne, 2 1 1—13) noticed that originally, the first and foremost virtue of the 
hero of the Grail was not chastity at all; on the contrary, his romantic adventures have sometimes 
a sexual outcome and are characterized by their fleetingness and lack of commitment. Only later 
on, as a result of the influence exercised by Robert de Borron's version, will the Grail's knight be- 
come the chaste virgin; this moralizing version will be popularized by Wagner. Likewise, the 
women of these sagas give themselves freely, after requesting from the men who want them to pass 
this or that test; they reproduce the Aphroditic and unsteady type of many Celtic figures. Arthur's 
woman herself has an ambiguous behavior, since she does not seem very unhappy about having 
been abducted. And so we may conclude that chastity and Platonic love are not at the 
forefront. 

2. For the meaning of Prometheus's punishment, see my Revolt Against the Modern World, 225. The 
reader will also notice that it is not very clear why Amfortas's battle cry does not become humility, 
unless "love" has a coded and initiatory meaning in reference to the Italian and Proven 9a! Love's 
Lieges. 



76 



The Test of Pride 



My love will give you peace and successfully protect you from all dangers, 
even though you will valiantly defend yourself. I am in you, and my fate is 
strictly connected with yours; I want to be close to you during combat. If 
you firmly believe in me, luck and valor will never desert you. 3 

Having defined in these terms the union with his woman and her occult ef- 
ficiency, Gawain undertakes the adventure of the "Castle of the Maiden" or 
Schastel Marveil. This adventure had been indicated by Kundry, the Grail's 
messenger, as the one that the Knights of the Round Table must undertake be- 
cause Percival, though he reached the castle of the Grail, did not successfully 
accomplish his restoring mission. In Wolfram this is declared to be the most 
daring of all his adventures, and in Le Morte D y Arthur it is declared "a great 
folly." 4 In Wolfram this adventure unfolds in the dream of the lady who had al- 
ready been Amfortas's ruin, namely, Orgeluse. Gawain succeeds in his adven- 
ture without getting himself killed. We shall learn the details further on; here 
we only need to note that in this adventure Gawain must prove to be ready to 
undertake all kinds of tasks, humiliations, jokes, and disavowals. It is, all things 
considered, a real test of pride, and of the ascetic faculty to struggle and to 
overcome any hubris, thus exhibiting a subtle inner self-control. 

This self-control may well be demonstrated in the allegory of Gawain's 
walking through the "estroite Voie" with which the adventure begins, that is, 
through a dangerous path, which in the Diu Crone is made of steel, as wide as 
a hand and laid over a dark and deep river; this is the only access to the "rotat- 
ing castle" and one that another knight, Kay, did not dare to attempt (generally 
speaking, this is the symbol of a tough path, equally distant from Prometheism 
and from a nonvirile sacrality). 

Gawain succeeds and makes Orgeluse his bride, instead of ending up like 
Amfortas. It is also a significant symbol that Gawain reaches Orgeluse's king- 
dom just when he finally finds the man who had previously "wounded" a 
knight whom he found in the arms of a woman: in other words, the same path 
is traveled again, the same cause is sought after, but the deed is successful. 

In relation to this, we notice the double aspect that, in conformity with what 
I have already discussed, the theme of the "woman" assumes. On the one hand, 
here we find the distinction between an earthly knighthood, which is inspired 
by a woman, and a heavenly knighthood, the object of which is the Grail. This 
can be seen, for instance, in the Queste du Graal, in which the knights about to 



3. To this Gawain replies, "It will look as if I am fighting, but the truth is that it will be you fight- 
ing in me." 

4. Le Morte D' Arthur, 13.15. 



77 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



leave in search of the Grail wish to take their women along but are prevented 
from doing so by an anchorite who declares that "the earthly knighthood must 
be transformed into a spiritual knighthood." 

More interesting yet, the texts of the Grail mention frequently and openly 
Lucifer's temptation by a woman: 5 this is rather odd> prescinding from the in- 
terpretation I have suggested, since Lucifer's action traditionally has never had 
anything to do with a sexual temptation. 

At the same time, the Grail cycle develops in multiple forms the notorious 
theme of kingdoms obtained by a woman who is seduced after successfully 
completing various heroic tests. It is through this way, for instance, that not 
only Percival's father, Gamuret, becomes king twice, but Percival himself 
achieves this dignity through Condwiramur, the invocation of which is assim- 
ilated by Wolfram to that of the Grail itself. Gerbert de Mostreuil attributes 
Percival's initial lack of success with his having abandoned his "woman" (here 
named Blancheflor), The Grail itself appears in strict relation with women. 
Regal virgins and crowned women always carry it and sometimes even embody 
some attributes of the Grail. 6 Percival's stepbrother, the "pagan" knight Feirefis, 
who "ardently yearned for the reward that women can give " devoting himself 
for this reason to every heroic and dangerous deed and concentrating his mind 
on the "woman " gains so much strength as almost to defeat Percival himself; 
he even becomes the bridegroom of the lady carrying the Grail (Repanse de 
Schoye). In this way, having been "baptized," he obtains the vision of the Grail 
and participates in the transcendent regal function, becoming the forefather of 
the dynasty of the Prester Johns. Antikonie's "kiss" has a peculiar power: once 
given to a knight, "it inflamed him to such a degree that he was ready to tear 
down entire forests with which to make countless spears." But Antikonie is also 
she who "makes a knight promise to go loyally and without hesitations to con- 
quer the Grail for her." 

It is especially in Heinrich von dem Turlin that one can see the connection 
and almost the identification of the theme of the woman as "supernatural 
woman" (Vrowe Saelde) with the theme of the Grail. Frau Saelde's palace — 
made of gold and precious gems, and of such a blinding brightness that at first 
Gawain believes the entire land is ablaze and containing an equivalent symbol 
to that of the Revolving Island — is a facsimile of the Grail's castle. The quest of 
the residence of Frau Saelde has many traits in common with the quest of the 



5. Le Morte D'Arthur, 14.9-10. Here the temptation is related to "the one who was the mightiest 
angel in heaven and who lost his inheritance." 

6. Of Repanse de Schoye it is said: "Her countenance irradiated such a brightness that everyone 
thought he was seeing the sun at dawn." 



78 



The Test of Pride 



Grail and is conditioned by analogous trials (e.g., defeating a wizard and a lion 
that spits fire); in other words, it appears as a phase preparing for the true win- 
ning of the Grail 

The text offers some significant symbols, beginning with the test of the 
glove. This is a glove that, once worn by the "pure," makes the right side of their 
bodies invisible, while in the "impure" it points out the part of the body that 
has sinned. Those who pass the test receive from Frau Saelde the second glove 
and obtain from her assistance and protection during the quest for the Grail, 
Though it is not mentioned explicitly, it is alluded that the second glove pro- 
duces invisibility of the other half of the body of the elect, that is, total invisi- 
bility. This symbolism may be interpreted in the following fashion: since the 
virtue of invisibility corresponds to the power of stepping into the invisible di- 
mension, of assuming a state that is not tied to a physical form, the woman (in 
relation to Saelde's second glove) here acts in the sense of integrating that 
which maybe derived from the "purity" of the knights who undertook this test 
(here only Arthur and Gawain pass the test). 

In another episode of the same story, Gawain reaches the residence of Saelde 
and obtains from her the wish of "health and victory for all time" for himself 
and of "eternity" for Arthur's kingdom, to which he belongs. Shortly after this 
virtual chrismation, Gawain must face a test that corresponds, in its effects, to 
that of Wolfram's Gawain, namely, the test of steadfastness, of inner self- 
control: he must go ahead, impassibly, without responding to provocations, 
challenges to duels, cries of distress, or knightly deeds concerning a rightful re- 
venge. If Gawain had failed in this test willed by Frau Saelde, the text says, "the 
court would have been dissolved": this is analogous to the effect caused by 
Amfortas s fall. The same symbol appears in another form, when Gawain, 
asked to choose between the possession of a regal woman (and thus of her 
kingdom) and eternal youth, does not hesitate to choose the latter, namely, a 
supernatural life. This adventure precedes a test that is the exact copy of that 
which Wolfram's Gawain performs in the Castle of the Maiden and which ends 
with the possession of Orgeluse. 7 

In summary, the meaning of all this, esoterically speaking, is that the woman 
(i.e., the vivifying force, the power, the transcendent knowledge) represents a 
danger only when she is yearned after; only as such does she substantiate the 



7. In the symbolism of the German minnesinger literature Saelde is identified with Felicia and her 
son is named Heil. She personifies felicitas in the Roman sense of the word. Saelde means Cluck, 
the quality of one who happily reaches his goal; this quality in turn generates Heil, namely, 
"health " "salvation," in reference to Saelde as a divine woman. The symbolism could not be more 
transparent, and thus I believe it to be a precise confirmation of my interpretation. 



79 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



Luciferian temptation and cause the wound in Amfortas 's "virility," which de- 
grades and paralizes him. She is the woman who, in Kalki's myth, never mar- 
ries anyone but the restoring hero, since all other men, as soon as they lust after 
her, are transformed from men into women, or in other words, like Amfortas, 
they lose their spiritual virility. When considered as a craving, or as an un- 
controlled desire, the heroic eros is a danger. In this context chastity signifies 
control, limit, antititanic purity, overcoming of pride, and immaterial unshak- 
ability, rather than a moralistic and sexuophobic precept. There is a significant 
saying of Trevrizent to Percival: "There is only one thing that the Grail and its 
secret virtues will never tolerate in you: countless desires." 

The "triumphal peace" corresponds to the Olympian state that is regained 
by the hero: "By fighting on you have pacified your soul." Asceticism of power; 
the overcoming of both the wild, virile element and of desire; 8 and purity in 
victory: only when these characteristics are present does the unshakable, side- 
real, and purified virile nucleus develop in a human being. This nucleus makes 
one fit to assume the Grail, to enjoy the full view of it without being blinded, 
destroyed, or incinerated on the spot. 

This is all I have to say concerning the most essential meaning of these parts 
of the Grail's legend. After having determined it, it may be worthwhile to allude 
briefly to yet another possible interpretation of what happened to Amfortas, an 
episode under which the theme of the woman, in a more concrete sense, may 
fall. 

The possibility of admitting in even a subordinate manner such an inter- 
pretation depends on the supposition that the authors of the medieval ro- 
mances had some knowledge of sexual rrfagic and that they alluded to it in their 
symbolism. It is not easy to answer such a question definitively. In any event, 
the following are the main reference points. 

According to secret traditions, man possesses the principle of an eminently 
virile force that, once freed from matter, is believed to manifest itself as a mag- 
ical and commanding power. Such force is paralyzed by sexuality, unless sexu- 
ality is given a particular orientation. The woman acts in a lethal way on this 
force when she awakens desire in the initiate, drawing him into a sexual inter- 
course aimed at procreation; and since the power of magical and supermater- 
ial virility is that which allows one to "cross over the river of death," one can 
rightly speak of a "slow death which woman imparts." Thus we can see a new 
aspect of the symbolism of a man who paradoxically turns into a woman as 



8. See Le Morte D y Arthur, 10.4, in which this double overcoming is expressed through the allegory 
of Sir Tristan, conceived as a knight of the Round Table; this knight, with the assistance of Morgan 
le Fay, the supernatural woman, smites both Sir Sagramor le Desirous and Sir Dodinas le Savage. 



80 



The Test of Pride 



soon as he desires a woman, and especially at the time when he engages in sex- 
ual intercourse. Beyond any moralism, whenever this happens to an initiate 
under the aegis of desire or abandonment, it amounts to a devitalization, to a 
wound or lesion of his magical virility. 9 With due reservations, a similar view 
could also apply to a further, subordinate interpretation of Amfortas's motif, 
who is wounded and weakened, in particular reference to the fact that such a 
poisoned wound is usually referred to the genitals. Moreover, in the field of 
sexual magic, the woman is endowed with an essential and dangerous force. 



9. Concerning these views see my Eros and the Mysteries of Love: The Metaphysics of Sex (Rochester, 
Vt.: Inner Traditions, 1991), 



81 



17 

The Thunderbolt 
and the Lance 



At this point I will focus on the Grail itself. 

It has been noted that the Grail, as a stone fallen from Lucifer's crown, re- 
sembles in a specific and significative way the frontal stone (urna) that in 
Hindu symbolism and especially in Buddhism often represents the place of the 
"third eye" or "Siva's eye." 1 This is an eye that is endowed with both a tran- 
scendent or "cyclical" vision (known in Buddhism as bodhi, or spiritual en- 
lightenment) and a fulgurating power. ,This latter aspect is in direct relation 
with what I have previously discussed, considering that it is with this eye that 
Siva incinerated the god of love Kama, when the latter attempted to awaken in 
him desire for his consort Sakti. Moreover, in some esoteric traditions of yoga, 
the frontal eye corresponds to the so-called center of command (ajfia-cakra), 
which is the highest seat of "transcendent virility," namely, that virility in which 
Siva s symbolic phallus manifests itself in the form of itara, to which it is at- 
tributed the power to cross the "stream of becoming" or to go beyond death. 2 

After all, according to its generic aspect of stone fallen from the sky, the 
Luciferian stone recalls the fulgurating power through the symbolism of the 
so-called stones of thunderbolt, or meteorites, mentioned in many traditions, 
in which they often represent the thunderbolt itself. Here Rene Guenon has 
shown the possibility of referring to the symbolism of the ancient stone battle- 
axe that breaks and shatters; this axe too has symbolized the thunderbolt in 



1, R. Guenon, Le Roi du monde> chapter 5. 

2. A. Avalon, The Serpent Power (London, 1924). 



82 



The Thunderbolt and the Lance 



traditions that almost always are reconnected with the primordial Hyperborean 
tradition and with its heroic or Olympian representatives (in any event> anti- 
titanic). 3 Thus the axe refers not only to Siva, who incinerated the Hindu Eros, 
but also to Parasu-Rama; it corresponds to Mijolnir, Trior's war hammer, and is 
the symbolic weapon with which these two gods strike and defeat telluric, titanic, 
or wild beings. Thus the battle-axe is synonymous of that thunderbolt with 
which the Hellenic Olympian god exterminates the Titans, and especially of the 
vajra of Indra, the heavenly and warrior god of the primordial Indo-Aryan hosts. 

This last reference is particularly interesting, inasmuch as the vajra includes 
three meanings: scepter, thunderbolt, and adamantine stone. The first meaning 
recalls the meanings expressed in the symbolism of the lance. A Celtic saga that 
has a strict relation with that of the Grail, is the saga of Peronnik. Its main mo- 
tifs are a golden bowl and a diamond lance that must be taken from a castle in- 
habited by a giant. The bowl has the same beneficial qualities as those of the 
Grail: "It instantaneously provides all the food and riches one desires; when 
drinking from it, one is healed from all sickness and the dead come back to 
life." The adamantine lance presents the "dreadful" characters of the Luciferian 
stone, of the vajra, the force-scepter-thunderbolt; it is an inexorable lance, the 
lance sans merci; bright as a flame, elle tue et brise tout ce qu'elle touche, but as 
such it is also a pledge of victory. As soon as the hero Peronnik touches these 
objects, the earth shakes, an awful thunder resounds, the palace disappears, and 
Peronnik finds himself in the forest with the lance and the bowl, which he 
brings to the king of Britain. 4 This phenomenology parallels that of the Grail 
and the Siege Perilous. 

Cyclical view, transcendent virility, power of command, axe-thunderbolt, 
thunderbolt-scepter — all of these, in the context of myths, are associated with 
the mysterious stone out of which the Grail came. This stone adorned Lucifer's 
crown, which he, together with his hosts, attempted to take back, in a sort of 
angelic revenge. Again, this mysterious stone was in Adam's possession during 



3. It is interesting to find the axe or the Hyperborean double battle-axe, carried by some kind of 
centaur, in several drawings and symbols of ancient Scotland and Ireland. See J. Romilly Allen, The 
Early Christian Monuments of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1903), 223, 253, 297. Naturally, with the "mi- 
gration of symbols," the axe came to be associated with various figures having a loose connection 
with the Hyperborean tradition, and sometimes real usurpations took place (e.g., in the cycle of 
the Pelasgic civilization). 

4. J. Marx (Legende arthurienne, 130-35) mentions the Gai Bolga as an antecedent in the Irish tra- 
dition. The Gai Bolga was originally the lance of the god Lug; it casts thunder and has the power 
to poison and to destruct, which needs to be attenuated with a certain mysterious procedure, lest 
it should burn the one who uses it. This lance is believed to have imparted the Dolorous Stroke, 
which endangered the regality and well-being of the court of the Round Table; it also wounded the 
Grail's king as well as Gawain during a night of unsuccessful tests. 



83 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



the "primordial state," in the "earthly paradise," though he too lost it. Moreover, 
in a sense, it is still mysteriously present here on earth as the "stone of the exile." 

The tradition of the earthly paradise as a seat of the Grail corresponds to the 
tradition that identifies them with each other. Wolfram talks of the Grail as 
"such an august object the like of which is not found in heaven." In the Queste 
du Graal, Galahad, contemplating the Grail in the palais espirituel, experiences 
an awesome shudder and begs God to take him out of this life and to let him 
into heaven, having already fully known the mystery of the Grail. In the 
Perceval li Gallois, the castle of the Grail is named Eden. In the Diu Crone the 
quest leads Gawain to a country that "may well be considered the earthly par- 
adise." During the fifteenth century Veldenaer relates that according to ancient 
sources, Lohengrin, the "knight of the swan," "allegedly came from the Grail 
(dat Greal), which earlier on was called the earthly paradise; and yet it is not 
paradise, but a place of sin that is reached through great adventures and out of 
which, through great tribulations, one can leave " Thus the Grail, in one way or 
another, is also reconnected with the new attainment of the primordial state, 
which is represented by the earthly paradise. 5 

I have already mentioned the tradition according to which Seth allegedly at- 
tained the Grail again in the earthly paradise. This is a very interesting motif, 
considering that Seth, in Hebrew, is a name susceptible to two opposite mean- 
ings: "ruin" and "upheaval" on the one hand, and "foundation" on the other 
hand. The first meaning points to the Luciferian substratum, to the wild war- 
rior principle that is destined, through heroic reintegration, to change nature 
and be transformed into a foundation; hence, the second meaning of Seth as 
"foundation" or "pole," having an essential relation with the regal function 
generally conceived as an emanation of the power of the center. In this we may 
encounter the interpretation of Wolfram's mysterious lapsit exillis as lapis 
beryllus, "central stone," and as lapis erillis, "stone of the Lord." 

In some Syriac texts, mention is made of a precious stone that is the foun- 
dation, or center of the world, hidden in the "primordial depths, near God's 
temple." It is put in relation with the body of the primordial man (Adam) and, 
interestingly enough, with an inaccessible mountain place, the access to which 
must not be revealed to other people; here Melchizedek, "in divine and eternal 



5. The "knight of the swan," named Elias or Lohengrin, comes from a place that is portrayed as the 
earthly paradise where the Grail is located {annates quosdam veteres volunt prodidisse, Heliam istum 
e paradysi terrestris loco quodam fortunatissimo, cui Grade nomen esset, navigatio tali venisse), as 
Arthur's seat, and as a mountain. The theme of the swan leads back to the same swan on which 
Apollo came from his Hyperborean seat, namely, from the solar island, which is the same as the is- 
land of Avalon; the latter, through the theme of the knight of the swan, is connected to the Grail. 



84 



The Thunderbolt and the Lance 



service," watches over Adam's body. In Melchizedek we find again the repre- 
sentation of the supreme function of the Universal Ruler, which is simultane- 
ously regal and priestly; 6 here this representation is associated with some kind 
of guardian of Adam's body who originally possessed the Grail and who, after 
losing it, no longer lives. This is found together with the motifs of a mysterious 
stone and an inaccessible seat. 

I have previously pointed out that a "central" meaning is inherent to the 
symbolism of the heavenly stones that are to be found wherever a given race ei- 
ther embodied or intended to embody a polar function within the cycle of a 
given civilization. Thus from the Irish regal stone, which I have repeatedly 
mentioned, we go to the lapis niger that was put in ancient Rome at the begin- 
ning of the "sacred path"; to the black stone of Kaaba, a traditional center of 
Islam; to the black stone transmitted (according to a legend) from the 
Universal Ruler to the Dalai Lama; 7 to the sacred stone that in the Greek hymns 
is the altar and the house of Zeus and the "throne at the center of the world"; 
and finally to the omphalos, the sacred stone of Delphi, the traditional center of 
ancient Hellas, which was conceived also as the first postdiluvian creation of 
the primordial race, the race of Deucalion. 8 

This sacred central stone (omphalos) was also called "betil" betil being a 
stone that, like the Grail, represents victory. We learn from Pliny: "Sotacus et 
alia duo genera fecit cerauniae, nigrae rubentisque, similes eas esse securibus, 
ex his quae nigrae sint ac rotundae sacros esse, urbes per illas expugnari et 
classes, baetulos (betillos) vocari, quae vero longae sint ceraunias" [Sotacus 
creates two other types of thundering objects, black and red. Those that are red 
are similar to an axe head. Those that are black are round and sacred, and it is 
through them that cities and fleets are defeated, and they are called baetulos 
(meteorite). Those that are drawn out are called ceraunias (thunderbolt).] 9 

But the name j3aiTi5?iog is identical to the Hebrew beth-el, which means 
"the house of the Lord," and suggests the famous story of Jacob, who "defeated 
an angel." Jacob named Bethel the region in which a sacred stone indicates the 
dreadful place where a ladder joins heaven and earth. "How awesome is this 
place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven," 
says Jacob. 10 And yet in Jacob we can still discern the Luciferian component 



6. R. Guenon, Le Roi du monde, chapter 6. 

7. Ibid 

8. The reader may recall the Muslim legend according to which the stone of heaven returned to 
earth after the flood. 

9. Naturalis historia, 37.135. 

10. Genesis 28:17. 



85 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



proper to heroic realizations: his name means "usurper". 11 Jacob struggles with 
the angel and forces him to bless him; he manages to see "Elohim face to face" 
and "to save his life" by fighting against the divine. The angel says to him: "Your 
name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel, for you have striven with God 
and with men, and have prevailed." 12 Here we can notice a singular analogy be- 
tween Jacob and Percival, who, despite scorning God, achieves his goal and as- 
serts his election; likewise Jacob, by winning, obtains his blessing. I wish to 
point out an even more enigmatic correspondence: the king of the Grail, who 
waits to be healed, either limps or is wounded in the thigh. In Jacob's story, 
Jacob is wounded in the thigh by the angel and limps. When the angel "saw that 
he could not prevail against Jacob, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and 
Jacob's thigh was put out of joint as he wrestled with him." 13 Once again we 
find further connections that I cannot pursue or develop in this context, 
Therefore, I wish to make this point: the Grail-betil is connected to the pri- 
mordial state as a foundation, and in relation to this, like Jacob's stone, it rep- 
resents something that unites heaven and earth, essentially under the sign of a 
supernatural-heroic victory and of a "central" function. 

Moreover, it is clear that the tradition that makes of Seth a conqueror of the 
Grail is related to another tradition, according to which Seth allegedly took a 
sprout from the plant located in the middle of the Garden of Eden. From this 
sprout grew the tree that appears in the legends of Prester John, Alexander, and 
the Great Khan in various forms, including that of the Dry Tree of the Empire. 
Such a tree appears in the Grand Saint Graal in the Queste du Graal and in Le 
Morte D 'Arthur (17.5-7), in relation to the so-called ship of Solomon and to 
the test of the sword. This is a mysterious ship on board which are a bed, a 
golden crown, and a sword ornamented with "strange pendants " These pen- 
dants are made with three strands of different colors (white, red, and green), 
which were woven by Solomon or by his wife with branches of a tree grown 
from a sprout of the central tree of paradise, in three phases of its develop- 
ment. 14 The sword is that of David, the priestly king who was often confused 



11. Genesis 27:36. 

12. Genesis 32:28. 

13. Ibid., 32:25. 

14. The explanation given by the texts is an example of the coatings of Christian elements: the ship 
represents the Church, and the three colors are those which the tree assumed at the time of Eve, of 
the birth of Abel, and of his death at the hands of Cain. In this last regard, we could utilize the men- 
tion of a fratricidal struggle to which the Celtic story of the Dolorous Stroke may be referred. Most 
likely the meaning of the three colors will become apparent to those who associate them with 
the ones present, for instance, in the Hermetic Tradition. In the Hermetic Tradition the three col- 
ors designate three degrees of the initiatory development and of the work of the "stone" from the 



86 



The Thunderbolt and the Lance 



with the figure of Prester John. 15 Here is a significant detail: the scabbard of this 
sword is named "memory of blood " memoire de sangc. An inscription warns 
that only one knight will be able to hold this sword; he will exceed all those who 
preceded him and who will follow him. 

The ship carrying these objects does not have a crew, since it was abandoned 
at sea and navigates under divine guidance. All this is clearly an equivalent of 
the "question that must be asked" as 1 will interpret it later; in other words, it 
apparently symbolizes the abandoned legacy of the primordial regal tradition, 
which awaits the chosen one who will restore it. Another equivalent symbol is 
Arthur's lost sword, which from time to time emerges out of the waters, flash- 
ing, awaiting the one who will wield it again. In the Grand Saint Graal this ship 
comes to get Nescien from the isle tornoiante (an island that constantly rotates 
because it is fixed to the terrestrial magnet and eludes the influence of every el- 
ement); analogously, in Le Morte D y Arthur (17.4) the ship comes from "parts 
west, that men call the Isle of Turnance." And so the motifs of the ancient 
Hebrew tradition merge with those of the Celtic-Hyperborean tradition, since 
the revolving island has the polar meaning of King Arthur's court, of the 
Round Table, of the wheel spinning before Frau Saelde, and of Avalon or the 
Glass Island or the Western Island. 

The Grail reveals its meaning of "central stone" and thus also of the Empire 
(lapis erilis), in the close association it has with the various themes and legends 
I have previously discussed. As a way of concluding this order of comparisons, 
I will recall that Alexander, like Seth, allegedly came close to the primordial 
center here on earth, to the earthly paradise, bringing back from it a stone with 
the same characteristics as those of the Grail, which Seth had previously taken 
from the same place: the stone is as bright as the sun, bestows an eternal youth, 
and grants victory. It is shaped like an eye (an allusion to the frontal eye?) or 
like an apple (the Hesperides?) or like a sphere. 16 

Like Alexander's imperialness, however, Rome's too seems to have been 
enigmatically characterized by the legend with the same symbols that reemerge 
in the Grail cycle. As a pignus imperii y in order to ensure Rome's eternity, Numa 
allegedly received from the Olympian god a bowl forged out of a meteorite, 
that is, a "stone of heaven"; at the same time, it allegedly corresponded to an 
ancient bowl containing ambrosia, which was the nectar of the immortals. The 



albedo to the rubedo. After all, red is the color of the Grail's "red knight" The theme of the fratri- 
cide probably refers to a test of arms ending in a usurpation, as I will explain in chapter 19. 

15. Le Morte D 'Arthur, 17.6. 

16. In Wolfram von Eschenbach, Alexander is portrayed as the one who, more than others, since 
Adam, knew the virtues of magical stones like the ones found in the armor of Feireflz, PercivaFs 
stepbrother. 



87 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



bowl was guarded by the college of the Salii, who also guarded the hasta 
(lance). The Salii were twelve in number, the solar number that also appears in 
the Order of the Round Table and of the Grail itself. The heavenly stone> the 
bowl that provides supernatural nourishment, and the lance are three essential 
objects of the Nordic-medieval legend that can be found again as prophetic 
"signs" foretelling the mystery of Rome's origins and its destiny as a universal 
imperial center. There is an almost magical concordance of meanings among 
all these traditions, which are so removed from each other both in space and 
time. 



88 



18 

The Mystery of the 
Lance and of Revenge 



I have previously mentioned the complementarity existing between the lance 
and the cup. In the traditional representations of the "double power" the 
scepter is often confused with the lance. Also, the symbolism of the lance, like 
the scepter's, often interferes with the symbolism of the "axis of the world" and 
thus points to the well-known polar and regal meanings. In the cycle of the 
Grail, the lance appears mostly with regal figures and presents a double char- 
acter: it wounds and it heals. This requires some further explanation. 

In the cycle, the Grail's lance is often bloodied: sometimes, rather than being 
drenched in blood, it produces a trickle of blood. In the Diu Crone, the king is 
fed by this blood. In later texts the blood acquires an increasingly important 
role, so much so as to overshadow the bowl that contains it and that originally 
played the most important role. In these texts, the Grail becomes Sangreal, with 
the double meaning of Christ's blood and regal blood. In the Christianized el- 
ements of the cycle, the lance of the Grail is sometimes believed to be that 
which pierced Jesus' side; thus the blood that flows from it is "the blood of re- 
demption," symbolizing the regenerating principle. This, however, does not ex- 
plain the fact that the lance wounds a person such as Nescien, who wanted to 
get too close to the Grail, only to be wounded and blinded; his sight returns 
and the wound heals in virtue of the blood that flows from the lance's blade, 
once it is pulled out of the flesh. 

In the Grand Saint Graal> when such a phenomenon occurs, a shining angel 
declares that this is the beginning of the marvelous adventures that will take 



89 

L 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



place in the land to which Joseph of Arimathea will travel, namely, in the 
North-Western region. Thanks to these adventures, "true knights will be rec- 
ognized from false ones and the earthly knighthood will become the heavenly 
knighthood"; then the miracle of the blood flowing from the blade will occur 
again. Even the last king of Joseph's dynasty will be wounded in both of his 
thighs by the lance and will be healed only at the arrival of the one who will 
discover the mystery of the Grail, being qualified to do so. In this context, the 
blood of the lance seems to be related to the virtue of the restoring hero. But in 
this text one also finds mentioned that the lanche aventureuse can inflict a 
wound, in the sense of inflicting a punishment that is meant to recall Jesus' 
wound. All this seems to overshadow the "sacrificial" motif; in other words, 
what is recalled is the necessity of a "mortification," or of a "sacrifice" as a pre- 
liminary condition for the Grail's experience not to turn lethal. In other texts, 
however, this motif is mixed with the theme of revenge: the lance, with its 
blood, hints at a vengeance that the chosen one must exact, for only then, to- 
gether with the fulfillment of the mystery, will peace and the end of the king- 
dom's crisis be ushered in. 

In relation to this variation the restoration assumes the character of a reaf- 
firmation, or of a victorious assumption of the same force or tradition that 
others had previously picked up only to fall or be wounded by it. In this con- 
text the Christian theme of sacrifice is modified according to a more virile 
sense, which should be considered the original one. In Vauchier the steel of the 
lance is found fixed in the body of a dead knight. The one who pulls it out must 
avenge him; thus, the avenger is also the restorator. In any event, from a blood 
of enigmatic characteristics (redemption blood, blood of sacrifice or of re- 
venge) we go to blood conceived as regal blood; the lance, in the end, leads to 
the "triumphal peace." The central and solar vein of this tradition is recon- 
firmed again and again, shining through the labyrinths of symbols and the 
opacity of historical stratifications. 

The theme la pes sera pas ceste lance is already found, together with that of 
revenge, in the Celtic legend of Peredur ab Evrawc, which probably influenced 
the Grail stories. Like Percival, the hero Peredur is cursed for not having "asked 
the question," which here means for not having inquired about the "extraordi- 
narily big lance" from which three rivulets of blood trickle out. In some forms 
of the legend, the castle in which these objects are found is confused with a sec- 
ond castle, the king of which is an old and lame knight. Peredur exclaims, "By 
my faith, I will not sleep tranquilly until I know the story and the meaning of 
the lance." The explanation, which is found at the end of the tale, is that the su- 
pernatural Amazons of Kaerlayw had wounded a king (who turns out to be this 
old knight) and killed his son, to whom the severed head belongs. Peredur sig~ 



90 



The Mystery of the Lance and of Revenge 



nificantly turns to King Arthur and with his help exacts vengeance and exter- 
minates the supernatural women; after this, the lame king regains his health, 
his kingdom, and his peace. 

The women recognize in Peredur "the one who had studied martial arts 
under their tutelage, though they knew he was destined to kill them." A per- 
ceptive reader will understand what this is all about. Concerning the wound 
caused by the women, the reader may refer to what I previously said from a 
double interpretative perspective concerning Amfortas's wound. More in gen- 
eral, we have here the aspect according to which the heroic type always over- 
comes the woman. The Amazon, symbolically speaking, is the feminine 
principle that usurps the function of dominion; though the hero needs the 
woman and through her is able to become such, he still must destroy in her the 
traits according to which she proved fatal for the previous dynasty. 

Moreover, the quality that makes the revenge and, in general, Peredur's mis- 
sion possible is connected to the test of the sword, more on which later. In the 
castle of the old man, Peredur had broken his sword by striking an iron pole, 
proving to be able to repair it immediately; but after two times, at the third test, 
the sword remains shattered and the old king says: "You only have two thirds 
of the force; you must conquer the last third. When your sword will be whole, 
no one will be able to compete with you." 1 This deficiency implicitly appears as 
the cause owing to which Peredur does not "ask the question" and thus cannot 
carry out the task of revenge. These are three degrees of a test that may be char- 
acterized by the following formula: "Once stricken, I rise up again." This refers 
to the capability of taking up again and reaffirming in a sacrificial manner 
(hence, eventually, a reconnection with the Christian theme) an energy that is 
broken in one of its material and elementary forms. 

The theme of revenge is probably related to some historical element that 
was absorbed by the saga, the king s wound always corresponding to some re- 
bellion of forces or people that have usurped or are trying to usurp its func- 
tion. The complete form of the legend follows this pattern: The blood that 
drips from the lance calls for revenge. Thus, to mend the broken sword is the 
first task, which leads to the question test. This is followed by the revenge, the 
restoration, and the glorification. Then the lance becomes a bright symbol of 
peace. 

The fundamental themes of the ancient Celtic legend of Peredur correspond 
exactly to those of the legend of Percival, which in this way evokes ancient ele- 
ments of a non-Christian origin and spirit. A last reference in this sense maybe 



1 . There may be a correspondence between the number of such tests and the three rivulets of blood 
that flow from the lance. 



91 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



indicated in the Destruction of Da Dargas Hostel and in the Musca Ullad, an- 
cient Celtic legends in which mention is made of a powerful and lethal lance 
and of a bowl containing blood mixed with a flaming poisonous substance. As 
soon as the lance is immersed in this bowl its flames are extinguished. In 
Wolfram, Amfortas owes his wound's torment and incurability to a burning 
poison in which the tip of the lance was dipped In this it is said: "God has man- 
ifested His wonderful and terrible power" 2 It is the equivalent of the poisonous 
and burning bleeding substance mentioned in the ancient Celtic legend. The 
lance, in its positive aspect of scepter, dissolves and puts out this substance, 
much as Heracles, as an Olympian hero, becomes the liberator of the titanic 
hero Prometheus. Then the darkness and the tragedy are dispelled, and the 
Hyperborean "memory of blood" which guarded the sword, is reawakened. 
The mystery of the "regal blood" is realized. 



2. If we were to adopt the interpretation according to which these are experiences of sexual magic, 
the "blood mixed with an inextingushable and flaming poisonous substance" would be a very fit 
alllusion to describe the state of obsessive desire, in which nothing can quench the thirst of the per- 
son "wounded" by such experiences. 



92 



19 

The Dolorous Stroke 



Let us now examine the various forms assumed by the motif of the fallen king, 
besides the one previously considered in reference to Amfortas. 

In the Grand Saint Graal and in the Queste du Graal the king has received 
wounds, from which he now suffers, when fighting against King Crudel, an 
enemy of Christianity. These wounds are not felt until he loses his sight for 
having gotten too close to the Grail. We could interpret the symbol in the sense 
that the failed realization of the Grail leads to the acknowledgment of an infe- 
riority, or having been wounded without knowing it, when struggling against 
the representatives of traditional non-Christian forms and defeating them. 

In these texts the wound is also related to the test of the sword that lies, to- 
gether with the golden crown, in Solomon's ship; this sword is sometimes 
drawn halfway out of its scabbard, named "memory of blood" and according 
to Le Morte D y Arthur (17.6), partially made with the wood of the Tree of Life. 
This sword, as I have explained, awaits one who has been predestined: a sign 
warns that he who wants to use this sword will find it useless in time of need. 
Nescien wields it against a giant, but it breaks in half. After Mordrain puts it to- 
gether again, Nacien is wounded by another flaming sword, wielded by an in- 
visible hand, as a punishment for having unsheathed the sword ax estranges 
renges, 1 In the Queste du Graal and in Le Morte D'Arthur, Nacien is told that his 
right hand has been smitten by the sword because of his sins; in the Grand 



1. In an interpolation to the text of Chretien de Troyes, we find this interesting detail: the sword of 
the Grail breaks in half at Percivai's first strike against Orguilleus; consequently he has to fight 
without this sword, but with his own, namely, with the sword of the Red Knight. 



93 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



Saint Graal Nacien is healed by a priest who walks barefoot on the sea, as if to 
symbolize the qualification Nacien should have exhibited in order to wield the 
sword legitimately. 2 Pelles too unsheathes the sword halfway but is immedi- 
ately wounded in the thigh by a lance; he will not heal before the arrival of 
Galahad, who is the predestined one. 

Besides all this, in the Grand Saint Graal we also find the principle of faith. 
Just when Nacien thinks that Solomons ship, carrying sword and crown, is a 
mirage, the ship disintegrates and he is thrown into the sea. Here the theme of 
usurpation merges with the theme of lack of faith; in one of the versions, 
Joseph of Arimathea's disciple Moses, lacking faith, is swallowed up by a chasm 
that opens up beneath the "perilous" seat reserved for the elect one. The 
weapon cannot be brandished against the giant without breaking, or before the 
one wielding it assumes a different quality from all that may have a relation 
with the elemental, the wild, the titanic (the giant) and before his faith becomes 
unshakable. 

The story of the sword is almost always related to le coup douloureux, the 
Dolorous Stroke. The following is the version found in the Queste du Graal 
This sword was used by Labran to treacherously murder King Urban in the 
kingdom of Logres (an ancient name for Britannia); since that time, the king- 
dom of Logres has been devastated by an epidemic. Labran himself, while on 
Solomons ship, drops dead at the act of sheathing the sword back into its scab- 
bard. It is said that from then on, no one was ever able to either wield or un- 
sheathe this sword without either being killed or wounded by it. 

Further developments of this theme are found in Le Morte D° Arthur. The 
revelant character here is Sir Balin le Savage, also called The Knight with Two 
Swords, who was believed to be the one who imparted the Dolorous Stroke. In 
these texts the sword is related to Avalon and is a facsimile of Arthur's own 
sword: it is carried by a maiden sent by the great lady Lile of Aveilon and may 
be extracted only by a knight "without villainy or treachery, and without trea- 
son" Sir Balin passes this test; that is, he successfully draws the sword but re- 
fuses to return it to the woman. Thus he is told that the sword will become the 
cause of his perdition. 

Balin later finds himself battling King Pellan: the sword breaks in half, and 
as he looks for another weapon, he finds the prodigious lance on top of a 
golden table. With it he wounds Pellan, who passes out and does not heal until 
"Galahad, the noble prince, will come to heal him as he follows the quest of the 
Sangreal" Next to the table, on a bed, lies Joseph of Arimathea, plagued by old 
age. This is the Dolorous Stroke that partially destroys the kingdom of Logres 



2. Le Morte D y Arthur, 17.4. 



94 



The Dolorous Stroke 



and attracts some kind of nemesis. In fact, Balin ends up fighting his own 
brother Balan, without recognizing him, and the two knights slay each other. 3 
In all this we can clearly see the representation of a wild irruption (Balin le 
Savage) who, next to a fallen regality (symbolized by the decrepit Joseph of 
Arimathea) does not act in the sense of a restoration, but rather in the sense of 
a usurpation, or, in other words, in the sense of a usurped force that only leads 
to an internecine conflict; Balin striking Pellan, of Joseph's dynasty (represent- 
ing a power that more or less corresponds to that which is conferred by the 
sword), and Balin fighting against his own brother Balan. After these events, 
nobody else will own the sword, with the exception of Galahad, who will be 
able to take it out of a marble stone hovering above the waters, that is, out of a 
supernatural and immaterial stability. 4 

In Gautier, the sword belongs to a knight killed by an unknown hand. 
Gawain puts on his armor (which is to say, he takes on his function), picks up 
his sword, and carries it with him into the Grail's castle. The king of the Grail 
takes this sword and notices that it is broken and that the other half is stuck in 
the body of a knight lying in a crypt. He asks Gawain to put the two halves to- 
gether, but when the latter is not successful, the king tells him that he is still not 
ready to undertake the task for which he has come there. As Gawain begins to 
"ask the question" and receives some preliminary explanations, he learns that 
the power of the lance has been neutralized by the Dolorous Stroke, which has 
impoverished Logres's kingdom. But as soon as the king begins to talk about 
the secret connected with the sword, Gawain falls asleep. The king, after all, had 
previously warned him that since he was not able to piece the sword together, 
such a secret could not be revealed to him. Here the theme of the broken sword 
assumes its most significant form: a part of it belongs to the type of a stricken 
hero, whose function is assumed by Gawain, while the other part refers to the 
dead king and, by correlation, to the task of restoring the regnum. To reconnect 
the two parts means to get at the heart of the synthesis proper to the restoration 



3. LeMorte D "Arthur, 2.1, 2, 15, 16, 18. 

4. Le Morte D'Arthur, 2.19. In the Grand Saint Graalwe find the following version: the king of the 
Grail's dynasty, Lambor, was wounded by an enemy named Bruillant holding Solomon's sword. It 
was the first stroke that this sword imparted in Britannia. To avenge this stroke, several conflicts 
erupted, ravaging the land, which came to be known as la terre gaste. At the act of resheathing the 
sword (we should recall that the sheath's name is Memoire de sangc)> Bruillant falls dead. The same 
text mentions Lambor's successor, King Pelleant, who also belonged to the dynasty of fisher kings; 
he is wounded in both thighs in battle before Rome, and as a result he comes to be known as the 
lame king (li wis mehaignies), who will heal only at the arrival of the predestined hero Galahad. In 
these versions what seems to be most important is the theme of a test of arms, which concludes 
with the inferiority of some representative of the Grail's regality. 



95 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



and to the primordial king, who rises up again thanks to the hero. But Gawain 
fails, at least at first. His consciousness is not able to follow the mystery of the 
sword; he falls asleep. 

In another development of the cycle, sleep, owing to which Gawain fails in 
his task, becomes the cause of the wound. Alain, in his Terra Faraine, had a 
beautiful castle built to keep the Grail, in the middle of an overwhelming cur- 
rent; the castle, named Corbenic, should be identified with the Grail itself, since 
in Caldaic, according to the text, "Corbenic" means "most holy vessel," sain- 
tisme vaisiaus. This is the castle of the "perennial wake" and of the test of sleep; 
no one is allowed to sleep in it. When the king, Alfasem, tries to fall asleep, a 
fiery figure pierces both his thighs with a lance; this wound will later cause his 
death. Corbenic is le palais aventureus, and every knight who falls asleep in it is 
found dead the morning after. 5 

An analogous theme is found in the Diu Crone. Unlike his companions, 
though he is asked to drink, Gawain refuses; this symbolic abstinence allows 
him not to fall asleep like the others and thus to "ask the question," "without 
which everything he had done up to that point and everything that he still 
could have accomplished would have been useless " The meaning of this is 
rather obvious. Just as "sleep" is a well-known initiatory symbol, so is that of 
the "Awakened One" and of the "Sleepless One " In every initiatory tradition, to 
overcome sleep has had the meaning of participating in a transcendent lucid- 
ity, free from the contingencies of material and individual existence. 

A variation on the theme of usurpation, which is somewhat connected to 
the theme of Amfortas, is found in the so-called Elucidation: the kingdom of 
Logres is ravaged and sterile because King Amagon and his knights raped the 
"women of the Fountain" and stole from them a golden cup. Since then, the 
court of the Fisher King, or the Grail's court, which was the wealth of the coun- 
try, disappeared, and the throne remained vacant for more than a thousand 
years. In the end, at the time of King Arthur, Gawain learns about this and be- 
gins his quest for the Grail's court and king. In Wolfram, Klinschor too is por- 
trayed as a man who violates women; this characteristic of his, presented in the 
allegorical form of adultery, is the cause of his emasculation and ensuing in- 
volvement in black magic, which is a counterfeit of true supernatural power. 
Klinschor owns a castle to which, with the aid of his magical arts, he draws and 
imprisons various women, including Arthur's mother. It is in this castle that 
Gawain s final test takes place, at the end of which he takes Orgeluse, the 
woman who previously ruined Amfortas and the Grail's realm. All this is rela- 



5. A night of tests was already a constant motif in the ancient Irish tales. See A. Brown, The Origin 
of the Grail Legend (Cambridge, 1943)> 218-25. 



96 



The Dolorous Stroke 



tively clear, provided one follows the interpretation I suggested at the end of 
chapter 16, One can see that the various themes of these tales form an overall 
pattern, at the center of which is one basic idea. 

In Manessier, the sword is that with which the brother of the Grail's king 
was treacherously slain and which on this occasion broke in half. The person 
killed is the corpse that lies in the coffin in the Grail's castle. The broken sword 
was preserved, but with its pieces the next king of the Grail accidentally 
wounded himself and lost all his powers: the employment of the wounded 
strength, if not reintegrated, proves to be fatal too. Here the theme of revenge 
is at the forefront. The sword needs to be mended; the one who is capable of 
doing it must then avenge the slain person by reaching Partinial, who is the 
lord of the Red Tower. After various adventures, which have an initiatory char- 
acter, Percival kills Partinial (who in this context may be the equivalent of the 
"giant" fighting against whom the heroes who are not qualified break David's 
sword); when this happens, the king of the Grail jumps out of bed, healed. 

In Gerbert, the lesion or wound caused by the broken sword corresponds to 
a crack that still remains in the mended sword and that motivates Percival to 
seek new adventures in order to win the Grail. During these adventures we find 
again the theme of revenge, since Percival regains his health and avenges his 
first instructor, Gurnmeant, whom he found lying mortally wounded. Second, 
we find the following important episode. At Arthur's court, to which Percival 
returns, arrives a boat led by a swan and bearing a coffin, which nobody knows 
how to open. Percival opens it and finds a dead knight inside, whom he must 
avenge. Having resolved to do so, Percival comes across another adventure; he 
opens a tomb in which a live man had been buried. At first the man tries to lock 
Percival in the tomb, but Percival succeeds in pushing him back into it. Then 
Percival reaches the fatal castle, and here he mends once and for all the broken 
sword. The same episode is found in Gautier, where the knight pleading for 
help from inside the tomb succeeds in temporarily locking Percival in it and 
then attempts to steal his horse. In yet another of these texts, the knight in the 
tomb is said to be the devil himself. 

The apparition of the swan is significant, since the swan is strictly related to 
the Hyperborean tradition and to Apollo, the Hyperborean god of the primor- 
dial or Golden Age. The coffin carried by the swan (the animal that will lead 
Lohengrin out of the Grails land) evidently symbolizes a mute invocation to 
make something that is either dead or decayed come back to life again, namely, 
the ancient Hyperborean tradition (sometimes the hero is also presented as the 
son of a widow who dwells and rules over a solitary, desolated forest; concern- 
ing the widow, see chapter 6). And yet there is the danger that the hero may fall 
victim to this death or to this sleep: such is the meaning of the demonic 



97 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



attempt to lock Percival, the chosen one, in the same tomb where a live person 
was crying for help. 

This meaning is integrated from what is written in the Diu Crone, in which 
the king of the Grail is said to be old and apparently ill. When Gawain, who 
does not fall asleep like his companions, asks the question, the king shouts with 
joy and gives the following explanation: he, with his men, had died a long time 
ago, though he looked alive and retained a semblance of life until the quest for 
the Grail was fulfilled. This happens thanks to Gawain, to whom the old king 
gives the sword, which will always make him victorious; then the king disap- 
pears with his men and with the Grail itself, in the obvious sense of inaugurat- 
ing a truly living and restored kingdom. In other texts, the purpose of the 
question is analogous: it has the power to heal the king and, at the same time, 
to restore his mortality, which was retained only in an artificial manner. In 
Wolfram, though the wounded king is healed, he nevertheless abdicates the 
throne, which is assumed by Percival. This is the real sense: a transmission. An 
ancient and decayed dynasty is liberated from its artificial life and ends at the 
moment in which a new dynasty proves to be capable of assuming the regal 
function by wielding or mending the sword, carrying out the revenge, and 
restoring what had fallen. The substitution, which occurs in an irregular and 
arbitrary fashion, accompanied by violence and a lack of proper qualifications, 
or in terms of a fratricidal strife, is the meaning of the story of the Dolorous 
Stroke, both according to my summary of Le Morte D y Arthur and according to 
various other confused and complicated versions. 

In Wolfram von Eschenbach, next to the wounded king, a magnificent old 
man lies on a bed. His name is Titure% the first person to whom the "Grail's 
banner" was entrusted. The Grail — that is, the function of which he still re- 
mains the representative — keeps him alive, although he is "afflicted by a paral- 
ysis that cannot be cured." The fallen kings mentioned in other texts often have 
an unnaturally prolonged life: some are a thousand, others four hundred, oth- 
ers three hundred years old. 6 They cannot die before the coming of the chosen 
one. This is an allusion to an interregnum, in the sense of a simply formal sur- 
vival of the regnutn. It is a mandate that is retained at a latent state and carried 
on by wounded, paralyzed, or blinded people until the restorer arrives. When 
we read in the Perceval li Gallois that PercivaTs father, obeying a divine calling, 
traveled to the far Western countries and could not die there until the arrival 
of the man who deserved to be called the best knight in the world, we find once 
more the theme of the "Western island," of Avalon and the wounded Arthur. 

Another interesting reference is provided by Wolfram, according to whom 



6, In Albrechfs text, Titurel is five hundred years old. 



98 



The Dolorous Stroke 



the poisonous and burning wound of Amfortas gets worse, especially under the 
sign of Saturn, or Kronos. 7 Saturn-Kronos is the king of the primordial age, 
who is asleep in the Hyperborean seat; according to some myths he was cas- 
trated at the beginning of a new cycle. What has been expounded helps to ex- 
plain why Amfortas's wound grows worse and opens up again under the sign 
of Kronos. Moreover, in the Hermetic tradition Saturn-Kronos is the deceased 
who must be resuscitated; the royal art of the heroes consists in freeing lead 
from its "leprosy" namely, from its imperfections and darkness, transforming 
it into gold, thus actualizing the Mystery of the Stone. Moreover, Kronos, gold, 
and "foundation stone" are different references to the primordial regal tra- 
dition. Wherever the sign appears again, the wound of the person who has ei- 
ther degenerated or usurped burns and becomes troublesome. 

The theme we have already encountered, of a slain or wounded knight 
whom the seekers of the Grail find by his woman (sometimes, significantly 
enough, next to a tree), 8 refers to the motif of the hero who has failed in his 
task; in other words, it awakens the Grail seeker to the reasons why he failed in 
his mission at first. Significantly, such a woman, conceived as a relative of the 
seeker of the Grail, makes him aware of his own name, which he himself has 
ignored. In any event she offers some explanations regarding the mystery of the 
Grail's castle; she blames the knight for not having asked the question, and 
sometimes she gives instructions on how to mend the sword should it break. 
Since in Wolfram the woman stands by the embalmed body of the dead knight, 
there seems to be a further interference, namely, the mixing of the motif of the 
king of the Grail, whose life is only apparent, with that of the hero struck down 
before he was able to conclude his adventure. In Wolfram this woman is named 
Sigune; she even curses Percival for his indifference toward the suffering king 
in the Grail's castle and the meaning of the Grail itself. 

A variation of the previous theme is that according to which the king is not 
ill and his kingdom is not devastated, and yet all this happens exclusively be- 
cause the Grail has been sighted together with the lance and the sword as many 
as three times, without anybody asking what purpose they served. Indifference 
and lack of understanding have caused a "great misfortune"; this is why King 
Arthur's court has lost its ancient splendor and why various conflicts have 
erupted all over the earth. This particular version of the legend has something 
that recalls the tragic tone of the "twilight of the gods." When Percival arrives, 



7. Wolfram goes on to say that his sufferings increase also under the signs of Jupiter and Mars, the 
representatives of Olympian regality and the warrior principle, respectively. 

8. The tree is almost always an oak> which in ancient Celtic traditions played the role of Tree of the 
World and Tree of the Center. 



99 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



the Fisher King has already died; his opponent, the king of Chastel Mortel, has 
seized the Grail, the lance, and the sword. Percival regains these objects and 
forces the enemy king to commit suicide, but he does not found a new dynasty 
of the Grail; rather, he retires to an ascetic life with his companions. A divine 
voice warns him that the Grail will never manifest itself other than in a myste- 
rious place that will be revealed to them; Percival and his companions leave to 
seek this place and never return. We will see later on that this episode may also 
have reflected a particular historical situation. 



100 



20 

The Fisher King 



A rather enigmatic problem is posed by the title Fisher King or Rich Fisher- 
man, which was bestowed on the Grail's king since Joseph of Arimathea, when 
the Grail's wounded king turned into another character, who at first assumed 
the traits of a fisherman. 

In its most exoteric aspect, such a symbolism can be reduced to two sources, 
Christian and Celtic. The Gospel narrative of the miraculous fishing is well 
known; moreover, the multiplication of fishes is the equivalent of the unex- 
haustible food supernaturally supplied by the Grail. This seems applicable es- 
pecially to the Grand Saint Graal, in which all those who had not been fed by 
the Grail were fed by a fish caught by Alain: this is why this knight was named 
It riche pe$cheour> a title that was passed on to the entire dynasty of the Grail. 
In Robert de Borron it is added that he who will call the vessel by its true name 
will be called "the rich fisherman," precisely in virtue of the fish caught when 
the mystery of the Grail began. Moreover, here there seems to be a distinction: 
although the effects of the Grail and of the fish are equivalent, the fish appears 
as a sort of complement to the Grail; it integrates the latter *s efficacy in regard 
to a certain group of knights who were not "fed" by the former. 

The Celtic tradition already knew a "fish of wisdom" (or "salmon of wis- 
dom"), which burns one's hands but which, once eaten, bestows all kinds of 
knowledge. This symbolism is so transparent as not to require further elucida- 
tion. Second, the fish plays a role in the legend concerning the transmission of 
the primordial tradition in Ireland. The Leabhar na h-uidhre relates that when 
the primordial race of Partholan, which conquered Ireland, became extinct, a 
man survived, named Tuan, who by assuming at various times the form of 



101 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



symbolic animals, managed to preserve the memory of the first generation. At 
the time of the Tuatha de Danaan he assumed the form of an eagle or a spar- 
row hawk; then he assumed the form of a fish, at the time the race of Milhead 
came to power. Once caught and eaten by a princess, Tuan was born again in a 
human form as her son and as a prophet. The king of the Grail as a fisherman 
might possibly have some relation with the obscure idea of a renewal of the 
legacy of the stock of Partholan, of its "memory" conceived as a mystery of 
"nourishment" that either equals or integrates that of the Grail. 

The dynasty or tradition of the Grail was often connected to Solomon. 
Some Arabian legends, which became common knowledge in western Europe 
during the Middle Ages through their Spanish versions, introduce the theme of 
the fish in connection with a quest for a ring that is equivalent to the Grail as 
a regal stone and stone of power. The ring has a stone with the character of a 
"fire that fills heaven and earth " a symbol of supreme power. Solomon, having 
lost this ring, decays. The ring has been thrown into the sea. When Solomon is 
fishing, he finds it again inside a fish and thus gains back the power of a visible 
and invisible dominion over people, animals, and demons. This ring of King 
Solomon is in turn a facsimile of the stone that Alexander the Great allegedly 
found in a huge fish and that, like the Grail carried by the Fisher King, has lu- 
minous properties, manifesting itself as a great light in the night. 1 

The last aspect of the symbolism of the fish may be derived from the evan- 
gelical saying "I will make you fishers of men" (Matthew 4:19) and also through 
Peter himself, the apostle-fisherman to whom Jesus later applied the symbol- 
ism of "foundation rock" in his aspect as the founder of the Church and as the 
center of the new religion and the aposfolic tradition. The "fisherman's ring" is 
one of the papal insignia. The explanation found in Chretien de Troyes is that 
the king of the Grail, having been wounded, has no other possible occupation 
and joy besides fishing. Here the king of the Grail obviously appears as the one 
who, acknowledging his powerlessness, looks for the chosen one, namely, the 
hero, as a fisher of men. A significant detail: in the Perceval li Gallois, the hook 
with which he fishes is made of gold. Both in this text and in Wolfram, the fish- 
erman is also he who points out to Percival the way to the Grail's castle, where 
he appears again, this time as a sick king. But Wolfram also says, "What he 
fishes when his pain abates does not suffice for his needs." 

A deeper meaning of these symbols can be found through intertraditional 
comparisons. As Guenon rightly noted, several elements suggest that the sym- 



1. In the French and Italian versions of Merlin's prophecies we find an analogous theme, the crown 
of the emperor Hadrian of Orbates> which was lost at sea; its stones were allegedly brought to 
Frederick by a fisherman. 



102 



The Fisher King 



bolism of the fish has a Northern and even a Hyperborean origin: "Its presence 
was noticed in Northern Germany and in Scandinavia [besides Scotland]; these 
regions are likely to be closer to its point of diffusion than central Asia, to 
which this symbol was taken by the great current, that is, by the primordial tra- 
dition that eventually originated the Indian and Persian traditions." Yet another 
fact supports this thesis: in the Hindu tradition, "the manifestation in the form 
of a fish (Matsya-avatara) is regarded as the very first manifestation of Visnu, 
which occurred at the very beginning of the present cycle and therefore is re- 
lated to the beginning of the primordial tradition." 2 

As a fish swimming in the waters, Visnu leads the ark that contains all the 
germs of the future world, and after the flood he reveals the Vedas (which, as 
the root vid suggests, indicate science par excellence), just as the wise Chaldaic 
god Oannes, after assuming the form of a fish, teaches mankind the primordial 
tradition. Thus the Celtic and Christian elements of the symbolism of the fish 
appear to be fragments of a wider view that sheds light on the Grail legend. The 
Fisher King is the fallen dominator who seeks to reactivate the primordial tra- 
dition, the Hyperborean legacy. This will be possible only at the coming of the 
hero who will know the Grail and who will be aware of its function and 
benefices, which, as we have seen, are integrated and mixed with those of the 
fish. Hence the other aspect of the same symbolism, namely the Fisher King as 
"seeker of men " of men in an eminent sense, beings who are qualified for that 
function. 



2. R. Guenon, "Le poisson," Regnabit (December 1926): 35, 36. 



103 



21 

The Seat of the Grail 



We have seen that of all the places in which the tests of the Grail's knights 
occur, the "Island" and the "Castle" seem to be in the forefront. 

The journey to such places should essentially be regarded sub specie interi- 
oritatis, that is, in terms of a shift of consciousness to a world that is usually 
precluded to human beings. The journey assumes a general and universal ini- 
tiatory symbolism, besides those specific references that I have previously men- 
tioned that refer to the tradition of Avalon and of the White Island, 

Pindar said that the land of the Hyperboreans cannot be reached on foot or 
by ship, and that only such heroes as Heracles could find it. In the Chinese tra- 
dition, the island located at the further ends of the Northern lands can be 
reached only by a flight of the spirit; in the Tibetan tradition, Sambhala, the 
mystical Northern seat related to Kalki-avatara, was said to "dwell in my 
spirit." 1 This theme occurs also in the Grail cycle. The castle of the Grail in the 
Queste is called palais spirituel and in the Perceval li Gallois it is called "castle of 
souls" (in the sense of spiritual beings). Mordrain reaches the rocky island, 
which is located in a place whence "the real crossing to Babylon, Scotland, and 
Ireland begins" and where his trials begin after he has been taken there by the 
Holy Spirit, And while Plutarch relates that the vision of Kronos in the 
Hyperborean seat occurs in a state of sleep, 2 it is in a state of apparent death 
that Lancelot, in Le Morte D J Arthur (17.15) has the vision of the Grail. 
Moreover, in the Queste, it is in a state of either sleep or death that Lancelot has 



1. See my Revolt Against the Modern World y 201-2. 

2. De facie, 26. 



104 



The Seat of the Grail 



the vision of the wounded knight crawling up to the Grail to sooth his suffer- 
ing. These are experiences beyond ordinary consciousness. 

Sometimes the castle is described as invisible and unreachable. Only the 
elect can find it, either out of sheer chance or through a magical spell, since it 
usually vanishes from the sight of its seekers. In Wolfram the Grail itself is in- 
visible to those who have not been baptized. "The water causes all creatures to 
prosper. It is thanks to this water that our eyes can see. The water cleanses the 
souls and make them shinier than the angels themselves." This description of 
the baptismal water should suffice to prove that Wolfram is not really referring 
to the Christian baptism, but rather to a real enlightenment, the water having 
here more or less the same meaning of the "divine water" or of Hermeticism's 
"philosophical water.' 5 In many instances the castle, after the hero has found it 
and visited it, suddenly disappears, and he finds himself on a deserted beach or 
in a forest. In other cases, the adventure of the hero ends with the discovery of 
the castle, even though he never gets a chance to ask the question about the 
Grail. The figurations of the castle surrounded by waters, or by the sea 
(Queste), or by a raging river (Grand Saint Graal)> or by a lake, and in which we 
find the Fisher King (Wolfram), are symbols of inaccessibility and of isolation 
(in addition to what has already been said about the "polar" figurations). 

We also find the theme of the "dangerous crossing." In the Queste du Graal 
the castle is guarded by two lions, the same animal that Gawain will defeat in 
the trial of Orgeluse's castle, which, again, is an initiatory experience. In 
Wolfram, the arrival at the castle in an extraordinary way is described as 
Percival's covering ground in the woods, while riding his horse, as a bird would. 
Here the castle is presented as "strong and mighty," with smooth walls that 
would make it impregnable even if it were besieged by all the world's armies. 
In the casde are "many splendid things that have no equal on this earth; but 
those who look for it unfortunately never find it, though many start this quest, 
In order to see it, one must arrive in it without knowing it." The place in which 
it is built is deserted, wild, and ghostly: It is the Montsalvatsche in the Lands of 
Salvatsche, and "the path leading to it is filled with ambushes." Wolfram adds: 
"One is not likely to ride so close to Montsalvatsche without engaging in a dan- 
gerous fight or without encountering that expiation of sins which the world 
calls 'death.'" The knights of the Grail, or Templars (Templeisen)> prevent 
people of all nations from approaching, with the exception of those who are in- 
dicated by an inscription that appears on the Grail itself: they commit them- 
selves to fight to the death any invader. 3 According to the Titurel> in the middle 



3. In relation to this, it can be said that the Grail's knights "live dangerously." 



105 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



of the woods is a mountain that nobody can find, unless one is led there by an- 
gels. This mountain, called Montsalvatsche, is protected and well guarded. 
Upon it floats the Grail, held by invisible beings. 

In later texts, the meaning of the mountain of the Grail, Montsalvatsche, 
often shifts in meaning from mons silvaticus to mons salvationis, in relation to 
the Land of Salvaterra and of San Salvador in Spain, where it is allegedly found. 
Generally speaking, various symbols always express the idea of inviolability be- 
fore any profanation. Moreover, the theme of invisibility, together with other 
related themes, underlines the notion of inaccessibility, which is proper to any- 
thing that escapes the control the physical world, of form and the physical 
senses, according to a limitation that, in the case of ordinary people, is identi- 
fied with death or with sleep. 4 We have already seen how the Grail's castle, upon 
which "the flames of the Holy Spirit" descend, is also that in which the "test of 
sleep" takes place. To pass this test means to go beyond the realm of waking 
consciousness proper to the physical individual. And yet this does not happen 
without a crisis and some difficult and risky action: according to a particular 
interpretation, this may be what the "dangerous fights" mentioned by Wolfram 
allude to. Those who have experience in such matters know very well that sim- 
ilar adventures may also end in sickness, derangement, or death. 

In relation to this> it is interesting to note the image found in a text: to walk 
on the edge of a sword. Lancelot reaches the castle of his adventure by going 
over a bridge as thin as a sword's blade. It is a theme known to several tradi- 
tions, especially the Iranian and Persian-Islamic tradition, which refers to both 
postmortem experiences (the other world) and to those of the initiatory path: 
the Katha Upanisad compares the asctent toward wisdom to walking on a 
razor's edge. 

The custody of the Grail and of its seat is about the defense of a certain spir- 
itual center. The seat of the Grail always appears as a castle or fortified regal 
palace, but never as a church or temple. Only in later texts is mention made 
of an altar or chapel of the Grail, in relation to the more Christianized version 
of the legend, in which it is eventually identified with the chalice used at the 
Last Supper. In the most ancient redactions of the legend there is nothing of 
this sort; the close relation of the Grail with the sword and the lance, as well 
as with the figure of a king or a person with regal traits, suffices to reveal 
the later Christian representation as extrinsic. The seat of the Grail, which must 
be defended "unto death," can be related neither merely to the Church and 



4. In an English version of Merlin, some knights of the Round Table witness a procession of the 
Grail, acclaimed by a voice from above in these terms: "Honor, glory, power, and eternal joy to the 
destroyer of death." 



106 



The Seat of the Grail 



Christianity, which, as I have argued, constantly ignored this cycle of myths, 
nor even, more generally speaking, to a religious or mystical center. It is rather 
an initiatory center that retains the legacy of the primordial tradition, accord- 
ing to the undivided unity of the two dignities, namely, the regal and the 
priestly. 



107 



22 

Initiatory Adventures of 
the Grail's Knights 



In Wolfram it is written: "Anyone who wants to win the Grail must clear his 
path toward this precious object with weapons at hand." This summarizes the 
spirit of the entire cycle of adventures undertaken by the Knights of the Round 
Table in their quest for the Grail. These are adventures of an epic and warrior 
character that also have a symbolic character expressing mainly spiritual deeds 
and not material actions, though not, in^ny view, to the point where such sym- 
bolism represents only a casual and irrelevant element. This clearing the path 
to the Grail "with weapons at hand," with all its duels, struggles, and related 
fights, definitely recalls a specific path of inner realization, in which the "ac- 
tive," warrior, or virile element plays the main role. The way that must be 
cleared by fighting is always that which leads from the "earthly knighthood" to 
the "spiritual knighthood." According to traditional expressions that I have em- 
ployed elsewhere, 1 this is not a "lesser war" but is first and foremost the "greater 
holy war " 

Overall, in such adventures or trials, we can distinguish two themes and two 
degrees: 

1. They are destined to confirm the warrior quality, causing the predestined 
individual to appear as invincible and as the best knight in the world. But for 
this, besides strength, wisdom and a certain mysterious vocation are required. 



1. Revolt Against the Modern World, 116-28. 



108 



Initiatory Adventures of the Grail's Knights 



Concerning the "vocation" element, recall that in the Perceval li Gallois, in 
Wolfram, and in Chretien de Troyes, Percival awakens to the desire of knightly 
adventures that will lead him first to become a Knight of the Round Table and 
then to seek the Grail when, taken by the birds' chirping, he goes on to obey 
"his nature and his innermost desires " This is a symbol I will mention only in 
passing. If we compare the atmosphere to a condition that no longer belongs 
to the earth element, then the beings living in the atmosphere, namely, birds, 
have often symbolized supernatural natures, gods, or angels in many tradi- 
tions, including the Christian one. Consequently, the birds' language has sym- 
bolized the "language of the gods," which is understood when one reaches a 
certain phase of inner awakening. 

I will provide further references: in the Nordic-German saga, Siegfried un- 
derstands this language after slaying the dragon. In Cesare della Riviera (1605), 
to understand "the occult and various chirping of the birds" is one of the gifts 
that the hero obtains from the Tree of Life (the birds dwelling in it are "angels," 
according to an evangelical symbolism). 2 Solomon, whose relation with some 
elements of the Grail tradition has been repeatedly pointed out (as well as 
other wise men, especially in Arabic traditions), was credited with being able to 
understand the language of the birds. Moreover, in some Celtic sagas the 
Tuatha de Danaan, who had become invisible, often manifest themselves in the 
guise of birds, sometimes in order to lead the elect to their "underground" 
dwellings. It is to this supernatural element, as some kind of higher calling that 
corresponds to a mysterious echo (this could also be connected with the saying 
"No one will recognize the Grail unless he has seen it in heaven first"), that we 
must connect the symbol of Percival, who is awakened to the vocation of a 
Grail's knight by the birds' voices and not by other earthly beings, and who in 
this way becomes free from the bond with his mother. 3 



2. Cesare della Riviera, II mondo magico degli eroi (1605; Bari, 1932), 169. [See also the thirteenth- 
century text by Farid al-Din Attar, Mantiq ut-Tair (The Conference of the Birds): A Philosophical 
Religious Poem in Prose (Boulder, Colo.: Shambhala, 1971) — Trans.] 

3. PercivaPs mother — who is opposed to his heroic vocation; who hates birds for reawakening this 
vocation in her son; who, with the hope of keeping him from leaving, provides her son with an in- 
adequate horse; and who eventually dies — is the symbol of a gynecocratic bond that is overcome 
by Percival, who, once he separates from his mother, develops the cycle of his adventures in the 
quest for the Grail. In Wolfram, the teaching transmitted by Gurnemanz to Percival amounts to an 
"overcoming of the mother." Gurnemanz, who teaches Percival everything that may contribute to 
"achieving earthly happiness" reproaches Percival for constantly having his mother's name on his 
lips. After Percival has learned from him the principles of the ethics of honor (which is carried to 
the extreme of saying about anyone who commits a dishonorable act, "Everything in him that is 
noble is irreparably lost and he goes straight to hell"), he eventually stops talking about her. This 
may be connected not only to the principle of the so-called men's societies but also, and more in 



109 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



The hero of the Grail is naturally requested to espouse the principles of 
faithfulness, honor, and truth, which are characteristic of the knightly ethics; 
these principles must not be compromised by later achievements. Of 
Trevrizent it is said that he freed Percival from the latter's sins committed dur- 
ing a period of ascetic life "without violating the laws of chivalry. 5 * For instance, 
it is repeatedly stated that in King Arthur's order there is no place for cowards 
and for those who are disloyal In the cycle of the Grail, to be faithful and to 
abhor lies is the first qualification. In Wolfram's prologue this characterizes an 
essential, almost metaphysical and ontological distinction among human be- 
ings, which is obviously an influence of the Nordic- Aryan component of the 
medieval warrior and virile world. On the one hand, there are those who know 
the feeling of honor and of shame, while on the other hand, there are those 
who are unable to experience this feeling. These two groups are like two races 
consisting of different substances, sharing absolutely nothing in common. 

2. The virile qualities, however, even if integrated, bind one to a specific task; 
this is, in the various legends, the main point. In the context that is the scope 
of this book, these qualities are accursed whenever their presence or acquisition 
does not lead to "asking the question" or some other equivalent. The hero ad- 
mitted to the Grail's castle has to heal again, to reaffirm or assume the regnum. 
If he remains indifferent before the mute problem, or before the wounded, par- 
alyzed, eviscerated, degraded, or senile representative of the Grail's regality, the 
demonstrated or acquired virtus turns out to be meaningless; that is to say, it 
proves to be incomplete, illusory, and almost "demonic," accursed by God, 4 In 
other words, the initiates of the Grail must aspire to a suprapersonal mission, 
which is the true measure of their qualifitation. According to previously men- 
tioned texts, to know the Grail and yet not ask, "What is its use?" is a proof of 
the hero's insufficiency. This is a matter of a committed spirituality, the ideal of 
which is not transcendence separated from this world. 

The countless adventures of the heroes of the Grail refer to a few motifs; 
having understood them, readers of these romances find only their endless rep- 
etition through the most various forms. As I have said, the readers find them- 
selves immersed in a fantastic, surreal atmosphere, and in a merging of the 
supernatural world with the real world; what is missing are the connections of 
coherence or of a true "literary" plot. The adventures are for the most part 
greatly disconnected; but often it is exactly their incoherence, coupled with the 
intervention of the supernatural dimension almost as if it were a natural fact, 

general, to the previously mentioned opposition between the civilization of the mother and the 

heroic civilization. 

4. In Wolfram* Percival is even called a diabolical instrument for not having asked the question. 



110 



Initiatory Adventures of the Grail's Knights 



that gives the sense of the events unfolding outside of time. The repetitions en- 
hance the nonepisodic, typical, and symbolic character of the facts and deeds. 

First of all, I have already mentioned the episode of Mordrain, who is taken 
by the Holy Spirit to an island-tower in the middle of the ocean. The island is 
deserted. Mordrain is exhorted to remain steady in his faith. What ensues is the 
temptation of a woman, and we learn that it is Lucifer who acts in her. Then 
comes the trial of a terrible storm, with thunders and flashes of lightning, fol- 
lowed by the apparition of some kind of phoenix (the miraculous bird of 
Serpolion), which strikes and wounds Mordrain; the latter remains uncon- 
scious for seven days (initiatory sleep) until, having overcome a new demonic 
temptation, thanks to an interpretation of one of his dreams he comes to know 
about the dynasty predestined to generate the hero of the Grail. 5 

In similar adventures we have first of all the arrival at the revolving island 
or island- tower, a facsimile of Avalon, which is presented as a deserted and dan- 
gerous place. After various trials the ship appears. This ship (like the Hyper- 
borean coffin drawn by swans) introduces the further theme of a mandate or 
task because it contains the sword and the golden crown, not without relation 
to the Tree of Life and to the sacred regality (David). 

An analogous theme is found in the Queste du Graal Percival is thrown into 
a stream by a diabolical horse riding as fast as the wind. He manages to reach 
the island, where he helps a lion fighting against a snake (purification of the 
"lion" strength). He resists the temptations of a woman in whom a demonic in- 
fluence is at work. Then a priestly figure appears and takes him aboard a ship. 
Manassier's text has this variation: while Percival rests under an oak, a diabol- 
ical horse appears, which throws him into a stream. Percival is assisted by a boat 
carrying a woman, whom he mistakes for his lady, Blancheflor, but who really 
is a demonic creature. The priestly boat arrives and takes Percival to a beauti- 
ful castle; there, a little later, he undertakes and successfully completes the test 
of mending a broken sword (initiatory integration of being). In that text, as in 
a previous adventure, as Percival approaches a bright tree, he watches the tree 
turn into a chapel in which the corpse of a knight lies next to an altar. The light 
is suddenly put out by a dark hand. Percival returns to the chapel to spend the 
night (the equivalent of the test of sleep undergone at Corbenic) and later 



5. In regard to recurrences of the traditional number seven, I will mention that in Le Morte 
D'Arthur and in the Queste du Graal Gawain must defeat seven knights to enter the chastiax as pu~ 
celles; that in the Elucidation the Grail is sought after seven times; that in the Grand Saint Graal 
Moses is grabbed by seven fiery hands after he fails the test of the perilous seat; that in Gerbert, 
seven years must pass before Percival, whose sword breaks, is able to find again the path to the 
Grail; an analogous theme is also found in Perlesvax; and so forth. 



Ill 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



learns that the devil himself was present in that hand> which had already killed 
a great number of brave knights, all buried nearby. He is told this by a hermit, 
a personification of the ascetic principle, who warns him to seek not only glory 
but also the salvation of his souL Percival is then thrown from his horse and 
thus he cannot catch up with the hermit; while he waits under an oak he finds 
the demonic horse and the adventures I have already mentioned ensue. Both 
groups of adventures are clearly two different versions of the same motif. The 
mortal danger of the trial of the chapel is the same that Percival faces when he 
mounts the demonic horse by the oak and lets it carry him. 6 

Considering the abnormally important part that the horse plays in the 
knightly literature, it is appropriate to recall briefly what I have previously 
mentioned concerning the horse as a symbol. 

If the knight represents the spiritual principle of the person engaged in var- 
ious trials, then the horse must necessarily represent that which "carries" such 
a principle, namely, the vital force, which is mastered by it in different degrees. 
Likewise, in the ancient classical myth related by Plato, the personality princi- 
ple is represented as a charioteer; his fate depends on how he masters the two 
symbolic horses carrying him. In the days of old, the horse was sacred to two 
gods, Poseidon and Mars. Poseidon is also the telluric (the "earth shaker") and 
the sea god, and thus the symbol of an elemental force; this sheds some light 
on the relationship that in the previously mentioned adventures the horse has 
with the waters and with the current into which it hurls its rider. In relation to 
Mars, the horse expresses a warrior orientation of the vital force, which corre- 
sponds to the vehicle of the heroic adventures that are typical of knighthood. 

This explains the esoteric meaning ofbeing thrown off the horse; it repre- 
sents the danger that the elemental or unrestrained force may take over. 
Likewise, we can now see the meaning of other episodes. The knight in the cof- 
fin, who tries to lock Percival in it, also tries to steal the latter J s horse. In the 
"test of pride" that Gawain successfully completes, as a condition for being 
taken across a river on a ferry, the hero is asked to surrender the horse belong- 
ing to the knight whom he is attempting to defeat. 7 To successfully tie one's 
horse to the column of Mount Orguellous, which was created by Merlin and 
the "polar" meaning of which is rather obvious, is the test that characterizes the 
best knight. This test is followed by the "sacred mystery," namely, that of the 



6. The various demonic creatures* whether horse or women, are unmasked and their plans 
thwarted when the hero crosses himself; this is the Christian version of the evocation of the su- 
pernatural principle. 

7. At first Percival only wanted to fight. This episode alludes to tests of a superior order, for which 
it is necessary to go beyond the strength symbolized by the horse. 



112 



Initiatory Adventures of the Grail's Knights 



tree turned into a chapel, and then by the "test of the chapel." And so on. What 
I have mentioned so far should suffice to help readers orient themselves wher- 
ever, in such adventures, something singular and abnormal relative to the rides 
of individual knights seems to suggest the presence of a hidden meaning. 

Coming back to the adventures that I have previously mentioned, the thun- 
ders, storms, and analogous phenomena found in them visibly correspond to 
those that occur during the trial in the Siege Perilous. The theme of the inte- 
gration offered by the Grail beyond the purely "natural" or warrior unshak- 
ableness, a theme that more or less corresponds to that of the boarding of the 
ferry or of the mending of the sword after the first test, assumes in Robert de 
Borron the following form: Percival remains calm and unmoved when, after he 
sits in the Siege Perilous, the earth opens up and thunder booms as if the whole 
world were exploding. Percival, however, owing to his bravery, which was not 
accompanied by asking the question (hence the reproach of one of the women: 
"Your Lord hates you: it is a miracle that the earth does not swallow you up") 
must now go through a series of adventures* Only after he receives the Grail 
is the stone of the Round Table, which broke in half under him, completely 
restored. 

Those who are familiar with the mysteriosophical literature will easily rec- 
ognize in these adventures the allusion to typical initiatory experiences, which 
are expressed through more or less identical symbols in the traditions of dif- 
ferent regions. Storms and thunders, crossings of waters, developments of the 
themes of the Tree and of the Island, abductions and apparent deaths are con- 
stants in initiatory tales in both the East and the West. It would be trifling to 
make comparisons, which could go on indefinitely. In Plutarch's and in 
Emperor Julians works; in the testimonies of the Hellenic Mysteries; in the De 
mysteriis; in the Tibetan Book of the Dead and the Egyptian Book of the Dead; in 
the so-called Mithraic Ritual; in the teachings of esoteric yoga and Taoism; in 
the oldest kabbalistic tradition of the Merkava — in all these works even a non- 
specialist can discern the supratraditional mutual correspondence of various 
symbols. Moreover, if one does not fall under the impression that all these 
things amount to poetic creations or fantastic projections that should be inter- 
preted from a psychoanalytical perspective on the basis of the "collective un- 
conscious " then one may recognize in them the corresponding stages of the 
same inner journey. I could refer my reader to other works of mine that deal 
specifically with this subject matter, 8 since this is not the proper context to dis- 
cuss ex professo the phenomenology and symbolism referring to the destruc- 
tion of the physical "I" and to the participation in transcendent states of being. 



8. The Hermetic Tradition; The Yoga of Power; Introduzione alia magia. 



113 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



I presume that my reader already has some knowledge of the matter and thus 
will limit myself to emphasizing the elements that are easier to understand. 

One of the more noteworthy adventures is that of the Castle of Wonders 
(Chastel Marveil), of which Wolfram says: "The fights you have engaged in 
until now were just child's play; anguishing events are waiting for you " I have 
already noted that this adventure is announced by Kundry, the Grails messen- 
ger, after she reproaches Percival for failing to ask the question with these 
words; "The praises people sing of you are unjustified. The Round Table has 
compromised its prestige by welcoming Sir Percival " The adventure of Chastel 
Marveil appears therefore as some kind of reparation, or as a proof destined to 
awaken in Percival a strength, a conscience, and a vocation that he still lacked. 
In LeMorte D y Arthur (13 .4) Galahad is induced to pursue the adventure of the 
Castle of the Maidens by a heavenly voice that he hears in a chapel on top of a 
mountain. 

In Wolfram's text, in which this adventure is referred to Gawain, the events 
unfold as follows. Once inside the castle (in Le Morte D 'Arthur this happens 
after the crossing of a river and the victory over seven knights), Gawain sees a 
moving bed that turns away as soon as one approaches it; it is said that "any- 
one lying on it will see his own hair turn white." Gawain, having caught up with 
it, feels as if he has been caught in a whirlwind. He hears thunder and horrible 
noises, which end only when the knight turns his mind to God. Then flying 
stones and arrows hit him, which do not kill him only thanks to the shield with 
which Gawain, lying on top of the bed, protects himself; nevertheless, he is 
wounded. What follows is the manifestation of a primordial power in the form 
of a wild lion, which Gawain, though bounded, manages to slay, losing con- 
sciousness immediately after. When he wakes up again, he finds himself healed 
by the women. Having passed this test, Gawain becomes the king of the castle 
and Klinschor loses all powers over it. This trial may be compared to the dan- 
gerous and deadly test of sleep. In the Diu Crone Gawain falls asleep in the bed, 
which begins to spin; the magical discharges leave him intact and he is found 
the following morning sound asleep. The test of dread, which is overcome with 
a reference to God, is followed by a "contact" and by a test that consists in en- 
during the discharges of a transcendent force that is awakened by this contact 
in the person who is to be initiated. Having mastered this force (symbolized by 
victory over the wild lion), the regal dignity is attained and the power of black 
magic is broken. 

Another variation of the adventure is as follows. In the first stage, Gawain is 
supposed to conquer the sword. He gets it by proving capable of slaying a giant. 
In virtue of the conquered sword, he is admitted to the Grail's castle. When he 
sees the Grail he falls into ecstasy, and while in this state he has a vision of a seat 



114 



Initiatory Adventures of the Grail's Knights 



occupied by a king who has been pierced by a lance. The question is not asked. 
Left alone, Gawain plays chess against an invisible opponent who has golden 
pieces, while his own are silver. Gawain is defeated three times in a row; then, 
enraged, he smashes the chessboard and falls asleep. The following morning, 
when he awakens, the castle has disappeared. In this episode, what visibly re- 
curs is the theme of an incomplete force (the sword). The victory over the giant 
does not prevent Gawain from being associated with the "silver" element, 
which is destined to be defeated by the "golden" element. Traditionally, silver 
represents the lunar principle, while gold symbolizes the solar and regal prin- 
ciple, for which Gawain, who did not ask the question, is not yet sufficiently 
qualified. 

In Gautier this test seems to correspond to the test of the woman, since it is 
said that it was Morgan le Fay who defeated Percival at chess; Morgan is a fig- 
uration of the supernatural woman of Avalon. In this version, Percival reaches 
his goal only after a new series of adventures, being conditioned by his ability 
to mend the broken sword (a new convergence of familiar themes). Moreover, 
the chess games he loses are followed by yet another adventure. A maiden ap- 
pears to the knight, with whom he falls in love; but in order to have her he must 
get the head of a deer. With the help of a bloodhound Percival manages to pro- 
cure this head. What ensues is an incident related to the theme of the "knight 
of the coffin." The knight of the Grail finds the tomb with a living knight 
locked inside who, once freed, attempts to lock Percival in. As Percival attempts 
to resist him, a knight who is the brother of the man closed in the coffin steals 
both the head of the deer and the bloodhound; later on, Percival catches up 
with him and kills him. The hero of the Grail is led by the bloodhound to the 
castle of chess, where he obtains the woman upon delivering the head of the 
deer. In Le Morte D 'Arthur the bloodhound leads the hero (here, Lancelot) to 
an old castle, where he finds a dead knight and a maiden who beseeches him to 
heal her wounded brother; to do this he must first obtain a sword by complet- 
ing the test of the Chapel Perilous. 9 

The meaning of the symbol of the deer is uncertain. In the Grand Saint 
Graaly Joseph of Arimathea and his knights, stopped by the waters, are magi- 
cally led above them, without sinking, by a white deer carried by a group of 
four lions. The explanation given in this text, which has been strongly influ- 
enced by Christianity, according to which the four lions are the four evangelists 
and the white deer is Christ, seems to me not to rise above the allegorical level 
of a late religious overlay, considering that the deer had already played an often 
important role in ancient central European and Scandinavian symbolism. In 



9. le Morte D 'Arthur, 17.22, 



115 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



any event, in the text the reference to the power of walking over water, a uni- 
versal symbol that has already been explained as the specific initiatory dignity, 
already suffices. In regard to the two episodes (i.e., the theft of the deer's head 
and the attempt to lock Percival in the coffin), considering that the two knights 
in both episodes are "brothers" they appear to be one of the many cases of du- 
plication of the same motif, which are very frequent in this type of literature. 
The Percival who is about to be locked in the crypt is identical to the Percival 
who is temporarily deprived of the supernatural privilege symbolized by the 
deer; in function of this privilege, and once integrated by the possession of the 
woman, Percival will successfully and definitely conclude the adventure and 
bring about the effective restoration of the regality of the Grail. 

The insufficiency of the mere heroic force, not in the special and technical 
sense that I have indicated, but in the ordinary sense of this term, is also ex- 
pressed in the theme of the double sword. The first sword, which Percival nat- 
urally carries with him or which he has won in his preliminary adventures, 
corresponds to the purely warrior virtues that have been duly put to the test. 
The second sword, according to Wolfram, is gained by Percival only once inside 
the Grail castle, as the one who is expected to ask the question. Moreover, it is 
the sword that, in the Diu Crone, the king who is only apparently alive gives to 
Gawain before disappearing, in the sense of passing on to him his own func- 
tion; in the Grand St. Graal Celidoine declares to hold the sword as dear as the 
Grail itself. 

In Wolfram the first sword originally belonged to the Red Knight. The 
theme of the Red Knight is not very clear. In some respect, he can be identified 
with the type of knight who is determined to fight his way to the Grail, weapon 
at hand. But being such a type and having such a dignity is already the result of 
a preliminary and almost natural selection. Thus the Red Knight is sometimes 
the knight who finds the Grail and at other times a knight whom the latter has 
defeated, and whose red armor and sword he has appropriated. 10 The trans- 
mission of a function from one person to another through the test of arms is a 
theme that I have previously explained and that is closely related to the cycle. 
Moreover, it will be helpful to recall here a legend of the Celtic cycle that picks 
up the same theme, though the Grail does not directly appear in it. 

Beneath a big tree is a fountain; while this tree recalls the Tree of the Center, 
the fountain in traditional symbolism alludes to the point at which the vivify- 
ing force gushes forth in its elemental state. He who pours water from this 
fountain causes a terrible thunder that causes heaven and earth to tremble; 



10. An intermediate form is that of the Red Knight who comes to the aid of the Grail's knight just 
when the latter's enemies are about to overpower him. 



116 



Initiatory Adventures of the Grail's Knights 



11 



then an icy wave mixed with hail rolls forward, which chills one to the bones, 
a wave so powerful that one can scarcely endure it without dying (it is the 
equivalent of the discharges in the test of the Chastel Marveil). Then the tree 
becomes dry, without leaves. Wonderful birds come and sit in the tree, and 
when one is about to understand their language, a black knight arrives, issuing 
a challenge. Many lower-ranking knights at the court of King Arthur die at his 
hand, especially as a result of not having been able to endure the wave that they 
unleashed. The knight Owein, however, passes the test, wounds the black 
knight, and, as he chases him, reaches a "large, bright castle" in which he re- 
ceives from a lady the ring of invulnerability and of invisibility, which are sym- 
bols of powers and of a dignity that I have already explained. The black knight, 
who was the lord of the castle, dies. The lady was his wife, the Lady of the 
Fountain, who now becomes the wife of the man who defeated her husband. 
Owein assumes the function of the knight whom he killed. The kings of the 
"large, bright castle" are the custodians and the defenders of the fountain; once 
they are defeated, their function passes on to the person who has won the 
match. 12 This is also the case of Percival, who after slaying the Red Knight be- 
comes himself the Red Knight, which is suggested by the fact that he wears his 
armor and carries his sword. 

In this legend, a part of the Mabinogion, the theme of the "test of arms" in- 
teracts with a test of a visibly initiatory character, which integrates the first. 
Ideally, it is to the successful completion of such an initiatory test, which is no 
longer "natural," that we may relate the possession of the second sword. Such a 
sword awaits Percival in the Grail's castle. "If you learn its secret virtues " 
Sigune tells him, "you will be able to engage in any fight without fear." The king 
of the Grail had used this sword prior to being wounded. The sword can break 
in half, but then, in order to mend it, one must use the water of the fountain 
called Lac. The hero, who through his unaided strength and bravery arrives at 
the inaccessible castle of the Grail, usually receives such a sword or is asked to 
mend it once it is broken. The last purpose of the quest, the "high glory," and 
the supreme dignity are achieved when the wielding of the sword or its mend- 
ing immediately lead to asking the question. "To put the sword in his hand 
amounted to an invitation to ask the question," says Wolfram. Once the sword 
is obtained, or one has performed any of the many adventures that in their va- 
riety of symbolism correspond to the realization, one must feel the need to 
know the essence of the Grail and also the mystery of the lance and of the 
wounded king. 



11, This reference to the bones is very interesting from an initiatory point of view. 

12. In Wolfram the dangerous lady Orgeluse appears to Gawain near water gushing out of a rock. 



117 



THE MYSTERY OF THE GRAIL 



Obtaining the sword or mending it means proving to be virtually quali- 
fied — or "invested" — to be admitted to the vision of the Grail, to assume the 
power of the Stone of Light or Foundation Stone, and thus to resurrect the king 
and to restore the ravaged or deserted kingdom. A first test may fail, and the 
sword may break; then it is necessary to mend it by the Fountain. In that event, 
it is necessary to go again through a cycle of adventures whose meaning is best 
expressed by the symbolism of the previously mentioned Celtic legend, the key 
to which is the "test of the fountain * This legend resembles the test of the 
Chastel Marveil indicated by Kundry to those who have been at the Grail's cas- 
tle without achieving the supreme goal. 

The hero, to whom the sword has already been entrusted once, thereupon 
experiences an invincible nostalgia. Percival says: "Whether close at hand or far 
away the hour in which I will again behold the Grail, until then I will not know 
joy. All my thoughts go to the Grail. Nothing will distract me from it until I 
live." Little by little the hero will rise from the still passive and lunar quality, 
which is symbolized by the silver chess pieces, and will eventually attain the ac- 
tive and (in a transcendent sense) virile quality, proving worthy of it. It is a pro- 
gressive growth, simultaneously Promethean and Olympian, along the way on 
which Heracles and Jacob, the winner of angels, won, but on which Lucifer, 
Prometheus, and Adam were vanquished. It is the same transformation indi- 
cated by the Hermetic ars regia with this formula: "Our Work is the conversion 
and change of one being into another being, as from one thing into another 
thing, from debility to strength . . . from corporeality to spirituality" 13 

Having accomplished this much, the regal crown of the Grail is acquired 
once and for all and the true Lord of thfe Two Swords is now awake and alive. 
Here a fundamental point must be remembered: in the theological-political lit- 
erature, and especially the Ghibelline one dating from the time of the struggle 
for the investitures, the evangelical image of the two swords symbolized noth- 
ing else but the double power, namely, the political and the spiritual. 



13. N. Flamel, Le Desir desire, chapter 6, quoted in Evola, The Hermetic Tradition (p. 99). 



118 



23 

The Grail as a 
Ghibelline Mystery 



Here we may briefly consider the meaning that the regality of the Grail and its 
order had in the system of both visible and secret forces that acted during the 
historical period in which these romances became popular. 

The becoming invisible or inaccessible of all that with which the traditions 
of various people have dramatized and preserved the memory of the primor- 
dial seat and tradition symbolizes the passing from the visible to the occult of 
a power that should nonetheless be regarded as regal. The kingdom of the 
Grail, in terms of a center to which, as it is stated in Wolfram von Eschenbach, 
the elect from all over the world are called, from which knights leave to travel 
to faraway lands on secret missions, and which, finally, is the "seminary" that 
produces kings, is the seat whence many kings are sent to various lands* No one 
will ever know whence these kings came and what is their race and name. 1 The 
sign of the inaccessible and inviolable Grail remains a reality even in the form 
according to which it cannot be connected to any known kingdom on earth. It 
is a land that will never be invaded, to which one belongs for reasons other 
than mere physical birth, in virtue of a dignity that is different from all other 
dignities and that links in an unbreakable chain men who may appear to be 
scattered in the world, in space and time, among various nations. In my books 
I have often dwelled on this traditional teaching. In such an esoteric sense, the 



1 . The Grail has the same virtue of the "stone of kings" of the Celtic tradition of the Tuatha be- 
cause it designates the one who must assume the regal function in a country without a king. 



119 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



kingdom of the Grail, just like Arthur's, Prester John's, Thule, Avalon, and so 
forth, endure forever. The words "non vivit" found in the Sibylline formula 
"vivit non vivit" does not refer to it In its polar character this kingdom is im- 
mobile. It does not get closer to various points in the flow of history; rather it 
is the flow of history, to which men and kingdoms get more or less close. 

For a certain period of time it seemed that the Ghibelline Middle Ages ap- 
proximated this kingdom to a great degree. This epoch appeared to offer suffi- 
cient conditions for the "kingdom of the Grail" to turn from occult into 
manifest, affirming itself as a reality that is simultaneously inner and outer, in 
a unity of the spiritual authority and of the temporal power, just as it was in the 
beginning. In this way it can be said that the regality of the Grail constituted 
the apex of the medieval imperial myth and the highest profession of faith of 
the great Ghibelline movement. The regality of the Grail lived more as a cli- 
mate than at a particular point in time, being expressed more through legend 
and fantastic or "apocalyptic" representations than through the reflected con- 
sciousness and the unilaterally political ideology of that time. This was the case 
for the same reason that that which in the individual being is too deep and dan- 
gerous for the waking consciousness is often expressed less in the latter's clear 
forms than in symbols of dream and of subconscious spontaneity. 

An in-depth understanding of the Middle Ages from this perspective would 
cause me to expound again the main features of that general metaphysics of 
Western history that I have already discussed elsewhere. 2 Thus, here I will only 
recall some points in an axiomatic form. 

The inner decadence and finally the political collapse of the ancient Roman 
world represented the syncope of the attempt to shape the West according to 
the imperial symbol. The spread of Christianity, because of the particular type 
of dualism that it supported and because of its merely religious traditional 
character, rapidly led beyond the process of dissociation, up to the point at 
which, following the invasion of Nordic races, the medieval civilization devel- 
oped and the symbol of the empire was resurrected. The Holy Roman Empire 
was both a restauratio and a continuatio y considering that its ultimate mean- 
ing — beyond any external appearance, compromise with contingent reality, 
and often limited awareness and various dignity of the individuals who repre- 
sented its idea — was that of a renewal of the Roman movement toward an ec- 
umenical "solar" synthesis. This renewal, which logically implied the 
overcoming of Christianity, was therefore destined to clash with the hege- 
monistic claims of the Church of Rome. In fact, the Church of Rome could not 



2. Revolt Against the Modern World, part 2. 



120 



The Grail as a Ghibelline Mystery 



acknowledge the Empire as a superior principle to that which she herself em- 
bodied; at her height, and in flagrant contradiction to her evangelical premises, 
she attempted to usurp the Empire's rights; thus arose the theocratic vision of 
Guelphism. 

Overall, according to the common perception (which, as a starting point, is 
correct), the medieval civilization was shaped by three elements: Northern- 
pagan, Christian, and Roman. The first played a decisive role in regard to 
ethics, lifestyle, and social structure. The feudal regime, the knightly morals, 
the civilization of the courts, the original substance that engendered the cru- 
sading spirit are inconceivable without a reference to Nordic-pagan blood and 
spirit. But while the races that descended upon Rome from the North should 
not be considered "barbarian" from this perspective (since it seems to me that 
they carried along values that were superior to those of a civilization that was 
already decayed in its principles and in its people), we can still talk of a certain 
barbarism, which does not mean primitivity but rather involution, in specific 
regard to their spiritual traditions. I have already mentioned the existence of a 
primordial Nordic-Hyperborean tradition. In the peoples living at the time of 
the invasions we can find only fragmentary echoes and obscure memories of 
such a tradition, which leave a wide margin to popular legends and to super- 
stition. In any event, these memories were such that forms of a tough, warlike, 
and rough-hewn life prevailed over everything spiritual. The Nordic- Germanic 
traditions of the time, which were largely constituted by the Eddas, retained 
slight residues whose vital possibilities appear to have been exhausted and in 
which little was left of the wide scope and metaphysical tension that were 
proper to the great cycles of the primordial tradition. 

Thus we may speak of a state of an involutive latency of the Nordic tradi- 
tion. But as soon as contact with Christianity and with the symbol of Rome oc- 
curred, a different condition ensued; this contact had a galvanizing effect. In 
spite of everything, Christianity revived the generic sense of a supernatural 
transcendence. The Roman symbol offered the idea of a universal regnum, of 
an aeternitas carried by an imperial power. All this integrated the Nordic sub- 
stance and provided superior reference points to its warrior ethos, so much as 
to gradually usher in one of those cycles of restoration that I have labeled 
"heroic" in a special sense. And so, from the type of the mere warrior the fig- 
ure of the knight arose; the ancient Germanic traditions of war waged in func- 
tion of Valhalla developed into the supranational epic of the "holy war" or 
crusade; a shift occurred from the type of the prince of a particular race to the 
type of the sacred and ecumenical emperor, who claimed that the principle of 
his power had a character and an origin no less supernatural and transcendent 
than that of the Church. 



121 



THE CYCLE OF THE GRAIL 



This true renaissance, however, this grandiose development and wonderful 
transformation of forces, required an ultimate reference point, a supreme cen- 
ter of crystallization higher than the Christian though Romanized ideal, and 
higher than the external and merely political idea of the Empire. This supreme 
point of integration was manifested precisely in the myth of the Grail's regal- 
ity, according to the intimate relation it had with the several variations of the 
"imperial saga." The silent problem of the Ghibelline Middle Ages was ex- 
pressed in the fundamental theme of that cycle of legends: the need for a hero 
of the two swords, who overcomes natural and supernatural tests, to really ask 
the question: the question that avenges and heals, the question that restores 
power to its regality. 

The Middle Ages awaited the hero of the Grail, so that the head of the Holy 
Roman Empire could become an image or a manifestation of the Universal 
Ruler; so that all the forces could receive a new power; so that the Dry Tree 
could blossom again; so that an absolute driving force could arise to overcome 
any usurpation, antagonism, laceration; so that a real solar order could be 
formed; so that the invisible emperor could also be the manifest one; and fi- 
nally, so that the "Middle Age" (medium aeveum) could also have the meaning 
of an "Age of the Center." 

Anyone who follows the adventures of the heroes of the Grail up to the fa- 
mous question is bound to have the clear and unmistakable feeling that some- 
thing, all of a sudden, prevents the author from speaking freely, and that a 
trivial answer is given to conceal the real one. In fact, what really matters is not 
so much to know what are the objects according to the Christianized fable or 
to the ancient Celtic and Nordic legends, but rather to feel the tragedy of the 
paralyzed or wounded king; once one achieves that inner realization, the sym- 
bol of which is the vision of the Grail, what matters is to assume the initiative 
of the absolute action that brings about a restoration. The miraculously re- 
deeming power that is attributed to the question can be perceived as extrava- 
gant only from this perspective. To ask is the equivalent of stating the problem. 
After all the conditions of the earthly and spiritual knighthood have been real- 
ized and the Grail has been known, the indifference that is considered a serious 
fault on the part of the hero is the indifference he displays when he witnesses 
without questioning the spectacle of the coffin and the surviving king, who is 
either maimed, killed, or retaining a merely artificial semblance of life. As I 
have already said, the dignity of the hero of the Grail is a dignity that obliges; 
such is its specific, prevalent and antimystical character. Historically speaking, 
the kingdom of the Grail, which was supposed to be restored to even higher 
heights, is the Empire itself; the hero of the Grail, who would have become the 
"lord of all creatures," the one who has received the "supreme power," is the 



122 



The Grail as a Ghibelline Mystery 



same historical emperor, Federicus, in the event he would have realized the 
mystery of the Grail, or would have been the one who becomes the Grail itself. 

There are some texts in which such a theme is introduced in an even more 
immediate fashion. 3 Once the chosen knight arrives at the castle, he directly ad- 
dresses the king and asks in an almost brutal fashion, skipping every ceremo- 
nial form, "Where is the Grail?" meaning: "Where is the power of which you 
should be the representative?" Once this question is asked, a miracle ensues. 

At this point fragments of ancient Atlantic, Celtic, and Nordic traditions are 
mixed with confused images of the Judeo-Christian religion. Avalon; Seth; 
Solomon; Lucifer; the stone-thunderbolt; Joseph of Arimathea; the White 
Island; the fish; the Lord of the Center and the symbolism of his seat; the mys- 
tery of the revenge and the deliverance; the "signs" of the Tuatha de Danaan, 
who in turn are confused with the race that brought the Grail to earth — they 
all form a whole in which the various elements, as I have endeavored to show, 
reveal a logical unity to those who are capable of penetrating its essence. 

For about a century and a half, the entire knightly West lived intensely the 
myth of the court of King Arthur and his knights seeking the Grail. It was a 
progressive saturation of a historical climate that shortly after was followed by 
an abrupt break. This awakening of a heroic tradition connected to a universal 
imperial idea was destined to arouse inimical forces and lead to a clash with 
Catholicism. 

The true reason why the Church became such a staunch antagonist of the 
Empire was the instinctive perception of the true nature of the force gaining 
momentum behind the external forms of the knightly spirit and the Ghibelline 
ideal. Even though on the other side, among the defenders of the Empire, an 
adequate awareness was present only in part, because of compromises, contra- 
dictions, and indecisions of which Dante himself was not exempt, the instinct 
of the Church was nevertheless absolutely correct. Hence the drama of me- 
dieval Ghibellinism, of the great knightly orders, and in particular, of the Order 
of the Knights Templar. 



3, J. L. Weston, From Ritual to Romance (Cambridge, 1920). 



123 




Part Four 



The Legacy of 
the Grail 



24 

The Grail and the 
Knights Templar 



It is hard to say through what representatives of the Holy Roman Empire the 
top of the hierarchy established an invisible connection with the center of the 
"Universal Ruler." Outside the Grail cycle, I have already mentioned legends 
foreshadowing the sensation of a mysterious mandate that the Hohenstaufens 
allegedly received, a mandate that they sometimes took on and sometimes 
failed to understand or even lost. In any event, it was not a coincidence that the 
popular imagination was led to relive through their persons the myth of the 
emperor who in the end will reawaken and triumph. The prophecy according 
to which the Dry Tree will blossom again at the encounter between Frederick 
and Prester John is yet another form of the hope in the contact that, during 
the peak years of the Ghibelline movement, could have produced the true 
restoration. 

Generally speaking, up to Maximilian I (who was significantly called the 
"last knight " who was symbolically related to King Arthur, and who, it appears, 
intended to assume the pontifical function), in the representatives of the Holy 
Roman Empire was reflected something of the chrism of transcendent regality, 
of that superior "regal religion according to Melchizedek" to which the politi- 
cal ideology sometimes referred when claiming the superior right of kings, 
who, according to their ideology, were not merely lay people, but men anointed 
by God. When confronted by this, the Church was led to evoke confused apoc- 
alyptic images and the story of the coming of the Antichrist. Especially toward 



127 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



the end of the Middle Ages one can clearly discern the Church's attempt to at- 
tribute to kings of the French dynasty, which was friendly to the Roman Curia, 
the positive traits of the figure of the future victorious emperor and to associ- 
ate the idea of the Antichrist to those elements of the legend that could be re- 
ferred instead to the Ghibelline Teutonic princes. Thus some people were led 
to see the figuration of the Antichrist in the traits of Dante's Greyhound. 

In any event, the Church was never able to overcome completely the impe- 
rial hierarchy. The mighty struggle between the two powers, which to a great 
degree degenerated into an antagonism between temporal interests and ambi- 
tions, was destined to end with the collapse of both, and eventually with the 
Lutheran deviation, which proved to be fatal both to the authority of the 
Church and to the sacred and integral idea of the Empire. Conversely, insofar 
as the militia of the Holy Roman Empire is concerned (i.e., knighthood), things 
went differently, sometimes even culminating in instances of repression and 
destruction. 

Among the various knightly orders, the Order of the Knights Templar was 
the one that more than others overcame the double limitations constituted, on 
the one hand, by the mere warrior ideal of the secular knighthood and, on the 
other hand, by the merely ascetic ideal of Christianity and its monastic orders. 
The Order of the Knights Templar approached more than others the type of 
the "spiritual chivalry of the Grail"; moreover, its inner doctrine had an initia- 
tory character. For this reason it was singled out and severely repressed by the 
alliance of the representatives of the two princes whom the order ideally tran- 
scended, namely, the pope and his ally, Philip the Fair, a secularized, profane, 
and despotic king who hated the aristocracy. These two princes may well cor- 
respond to Dante's symbols of the Giant and the Prostitute, 

Whatever the "real" motives behind the destruction of the Templars were, 
they are of little or no account. In such cases, these motives are always occa- 
sional: they only help to set in motion the forces needed to implement a design, 
the directing intelligence of which is to be found on a much deeper plane. In 
virtue of the nature of the templar ideal, the order was bound to be destroyed. 
After all, the Church's sentiment against chivalry did not fail to manifest itself 
even against other orders, though through different excuses. In 1238 Pope 
Gregory IX targeted the Order of St. John for alleged abuses and betrayals, but 
also hinting at the presence of heretical elements in the Order. In 1307 the 
Teutonic Knights were likewise accused of heresy by the archbishop of Riga; 
their leader barely managed to save the order, though with great effort. But the 
main object of the Church's attack was the Knights Templar. The destruction 
of this order coincides with the interruption of the metaphysical tension of the 



128 



The Grail and the Knights Templar 



Ghibelline Middle Ages; when it was accomplished, the contacts were inter- 
rupted again. This marks the initial breaking point, the beginning of the de- 
cline of the West. 

The struggle against the Templar Order may truly be regarded, more so than 
the one waged against the Cathars, as a crusade against the Grail. In Wolfram, 
the analogy between the Grail knights and the Templars is revealed by the name 
Templeisen, namely, Templars, which is given to the custodians of the Grail, 
even though no temple is mentioned. In Perlesvax, the guardians of the Grail 
in the "Island" are both ascetic and warriorlike and, like the Knights Templar, 
wear a red cross on a white garment. Joseph of Arimathea gives to Evelach 
(Galahad's ancestor, who was a hero of the Grail and of King Arthur) a white 
shield with a Vermillion cross, which is the same emblem exclusively given by 
Pope Eugene III to the Templars, in 1147. A ship with this same Templar em- 
blem, a red cross on a white sail, comes to take Percival to the unknown seat 
where the Grail had been taken to, and whence Percival will never return. The 
same themes are found in the romance Som de Nansai, since here too the Grail 
ends up being guarded by warrior monks who live on an island, whence from 
time to time those who are destined to become kings in other lands depart. 

Templar chivalry was characteristically an order in which fighting and 
especially "holy war" were regarded as a path of asceticism and liberation. Ex- 
ternally, it embraced Christianity, but in its highest mystery, which was re- 
stricted to an inner circle, it went beyond the Christian religion, rejecting the 
worship of Christ and the main limitations of a devotional type. This chivalry 
also tended to shift the principle of supreme spiritual authority to a center 
other than Rome, a center more properly designated with the nobler and more 
universal term "Temple" rather than "Church " 

This is clear enough in the acts and proceedings of the trial against the 
Knights Templar. Even though the evidence was distorted or painted with blas- 
phemous tinges, either intentionally or because of a misunderstanding, the ex- 
pert eye will easily recognize its true scope. 

Of course one should not idealize the entire Templar Order in its historical 
concreteness, especially when the latter grew out of proportion (at one point it 
had nine thousand centers) and acquired a mighty temporal power and wealth. 
Among their members there certainly were men who did not live up to the 
ideal and who lacked all necessary skills, even in the case of Great Master 
Gerard of Ridfor t ( 1 1 84- 1189). What I am going to say now does not apply to 
the great majority of the Templars in the last years of the order's life, but rather 
to a hierarchy that, as often happens in these cases, did not necessarily coincide 
with the visible and official hierarchy. 



129 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



First of all, it has consistently been shown, not only through confessions ex- 
torted with torture but also through spontaneous declarations, that the 
Templars had a secret ritual of an authentically initiatory character. As a con- 
dition to be admitted to this rite, or as an introductory phase to it, one had to 
abjure the worship of Christ. The knight who aspired to the various levels of 
the order's inner hierarchy had to step over the crucifix and insult it. He was 
ordered "not to believe in the Crucified One, but in the Lord who is in heaven"; 
he was taught that Jesus had been a false prophet — not a divine figure who died 
to atone for men's sins, but a very ordinary man who died because of his own 
mistakes. The text of the indictment was formulated in this manner: Et post 
crux portaretur et ibi dicetur sibi quod crucifixus non est Christus, sed quidamfal- 
sus propheta, depetatus per Iudaeos ad mortem propter delicto, sua. This should 
be regarded not as a true abjuration, much less as a blasphemy, but rather as a 
sort of test: the initiate had to demonstrate his capability to go beyond an exo- 
teric cult of a merely religious-devotional type. The rite in question was ap- 
parently celebrated on Good Friday; however, Good Friday also happens to be 
the day that often corresponds to the celebration of the mystery of the Grail or 
to the arrival of the hero in the inaccessible castle of the Grail. 

A further charge was that the Templars despised the sacraments, especially 
penance and confession — those practices most influenced by the pathos of sin 
and expiation. The Templars allegedly did not acknowledge the supreme au- 
thority of the pope and of the Church and followed Christian precepts only in 
appearance. All this could be the counterpart of the anti-Christolatric rite, 
namely, the overcoming of Christian exotericism and of the usurping claim to 
embody the supreme spiritual authority on the part of a merely dogmatic-re- 
ligious institution, totally unaware of both the pragmatic justification of its 
own limitations and the traditional elements present at a latent state in its doc- 
trines and symbols. 1 

Moreover, the Templars were charged with keeping secret liaisons with 
Muslims and being closer to the Islamic faith than to the Christian one. This 
last charge is probably best understood by remembering that Islam too is char- 
acterized by the rejection of Christ worship. The "secret liaisons" allude to a 
perspective that is less sectarian, more universal, and thus more esoteric than 
that of militant Christianity. The Crusades, in which the Templars and in gen- 
eral the Ghibelline chivalry played a fundamental role, in many respects created 
a supratraditional bridge between West and East. The crusading knighthood 
ended up confronting a facsimile of itself, namely, warriors who abided by cor- 
responding ethics, chivalrous customs, ideals of a "holy war," and initiatory 



1. See my Maschera e volto dello spiritualismo contemporaneo, chapter 7. 



130 



The Grail and the Knights Templar 



currents. Thus the Templars were the Christian equivalent of the Arab Order of 
the Ishmaelites, 2 who likewise regarded themselves as the "guardians of the 
Holy Land" (in an esoteric and symbolic sense), and who had two hierarchies, 
one official and one secret. Such an order, which had a double character, both 
warrior and religious, almost met the same fate as that of the Templars, and for 
analogous reasons: its initiatory character and its upholding an esotericism 
that despised the literal meaning of sacred scriptures. 3 In Ishmaelite esoteri- 
cism we find again the same theme of the Ghibelline imperial saga: the Islamic 
dogma of the "resurrection" (kiyama) is here interpreted as the new manifesta- 
tion of the Supreme Leader (Mahdl), who became invisible during the so- 
called period of "absence" (ghayba). This is so because the Mahdi at one point 
disappeared, thus eluding death, leaving his followers under the obligation of 
swearing allegiance and obedience unto him as if he were Allah himself. 4 

In these terms it was possible to gradually establish an acknowledgment 
inter pares beyond any partisan spirit and historical contingency, or a sort of 
supratraditional understanding like the symbol of the "Temple." Moreover, ex- 
clusivism and sectarianism being features of exotericism, that is, of a tradition's 
external and profane aspects, we find again here the "overcoming" attitude that 
already characterized the Templars. In reference to the Crusades we learn from 
history that this "secret understanding" never amounted to a military betrayal, 
considering that the Templars were among the bravest, most faithful and war- 
riorlike soldiers during all the Crusades. That which rather corresponded to it 
was probably the expunging from the notion of "holy war" of its materialistic 
and external aspect of war waged against the "infidel" and of death for the 
"true" faith, and its restoration to its purest, most metaphysical meaning. 
According to this meaning, what really mattered was no longer a particular pro- 
fession of faith, but the simple capacity to turn war into an ascetic preparation 



2. The Nizarl Isma'iliyah, whose members were called hashlshiyah, or "hashish smokers," whence 
their English name, Assassins, is derived. {Trans.] 

3. Templars and Ishmaelites carried the same colors (red and white): cross and cloak the former, 
belt and garment the latter. The supreme leader of the Ishmaelites, the "lord of the mountain," 
shaykh al-jabal, was thought of as an invisible dominator "who had in his hands the life and death 
of kings." To his person and to his inaccessible dwelling, identified with Paradise, was applied a 
symbolism that corresponds to that of the King of the Grail and of the Universal Ruler. One of the 
charges against the Templars was of having allied with the Lord of the Mountain. 

4. These views, with minor variations, are common to the branch of the Shi'a that still is the offi- 
cial religion in modern Iran. The Ishmaelites had an initiation with seven degrees, starting from 
the fourth of which the transmission of the suprareligious esoteric teaching (ta'wil) began; the 
adept was then believed to be above any law. Antinomianism replaced blind and unconditional 
obedience to the leader, which was the rule of the first three degrees. 



131 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



for the attainment of immortality. On the Muslim side, too, the ultimate mean- 
ing of the "holy war" (jihad) was not any different, 5 

In the cycle of the Grail we have something similar to the "secret liaisons" 
considered in the supratraditional sense of the term: that is, in the mixture of 
Arab, pagan, and Christian elements. Wolfram eventually attributed to a 
"pagan" source the story of the Grail found by Kyot Likewise, we have seen that 
PercivaTs father, though a Christian, felt no repugnance to fight under Saracen 
princes; that Joseph of Arimathea himself is described as benefiting from the 
Grail even before being baptized; that not only Christian but also pagan 
knights fought for the Grail; and that the pagan knight Firefiz, through the test 
of arms, almost proved to be better than his Christian brother, and before being 
baptized became a member of Arthur's knights. Conversely, Baruch is pre- 
sented as a caliph, that is, as a non-Christian. The dynasty of Prester John, 
which is connected to the dynasty of the Grail, includes pagans and Christians, 
and even, according to some, a majority of pagan princes. In conclusion, apart 
from some later texts that reflect a heavy Christian influence, in many of its 
parts the Grail literature displays the same antisectarian and supratraditional 
spirit that inspired the charge leveled against the Templars, of developing "se- 
cret liaisons " These liaisons probably consisted in the capability of acknowl- 
edging the same tradition even in forms other than the Christian one. 

The central ritual of Templar initiation was kept very secret. From one of 
the proceedings of the trial we learn that a knight who underwent it returned 
as pale as a corpse and with a lost expression on his face, claiming that from 
then on he could never be happy again. Shortly after, the same knight fell into 
a state of invincible depression and died. Such effects recall those produced in 
some of the tests of the Grails, tests that "turn one's hair as white as snow" and 
induce, in those who fail, a deep disgust with all earthly things as well as a deep 
and incurable unhappiness. What produces an extreme terror in some knights 
and causes them to flee, according to another testimony of the Templars, is the 
vision of an "idol," which is described in various forms. These forms, as they 
are described in the proceedings of the trial, are difficult to interpret: a majes- 
tic golden figure, a virgin, the apparition of an animal's head such as a ram's, a 
crowned older man, an androgynous or two-faced figure. Most likely these are 
dramatizations of the initiatory consciousness, in which a given content of an 



5. See my Revolt Against the Modern World* chapters 18 and 19. This too was the true meaning of 
righting according to the knights of the Grail: to them it did not matter whether their opponent 
was a Christian or a Saracen, just as it did not matter whether their fight ended in victory or death, 
since fighting for them was an ascesis and a purification, with the exception of their "superor- 
dained" task of defending the "seat of the Grail" and of blocking access to it. 



132 




The Grail and the Knights Templar 



individual's imagination can play a determining role. We may also get some 
orientation through testimonies such as the one claiming that the idol is a 
"demon" who (allegorically) "bestows wisdom and riches" that are virtues 
which we have already seen referred to the Grail. The name frequently given to 
the mysterious idol, Baphomet, in all likelihood comes from the Greek jiapr\ 
ar\%o[iC,y meaning "baptism of wisdom" or a gnosis in a higher sense; this may 
have been the name of a ritual that most likely passed on to the idol. 

The vision of the idol allegedly occurred at a given point during Mass, as a 
mystery to which Mass itself was subordinated. This recalls the ceremonies de- 
scribed in the more Christianized Grail texts: a sort of Mass having the Grail as 
its main reference point, with the sense of a mystery too dangerous to explore, 
least one is stricken by a sword or loses his sight. 

In Wolfram, however, wisdom is what Percival, a "soul of steel," eventually 
achieves. According to others, "wisdom" (Philosophine) is PercivaFs own 
mother, who is conceived as the original bearer of the Grail. In gnostic litera- 
ture, wisdom is often symbolized by a woman (the virgin Sophia); while this, 
on the one hand, points to that explanation according to which Baphomet, as 
the center of the Templar baptism of wisdom, is a "virgin " on the other hand 
it recalls how the symbolism of the woman played such a great role in knightly 
adventures and in the heroic cycle. Bernard of Clairvaux, who was regarded as 
a sort of spiritual father of the Templars, was also called the Knight of the 
Virgin. In another testimony, of Nordic or English origins, the Templar mys- 
tery, like the Grail's, seems to have a relation with a sacred stone; the Templars, 
in their most difficult times, allegedly turned for help to a stone contained in 
their altar. In Medieval Hermeticism, Rebis, the "double thing," designated the 
"stone." This may also establish a relation with the symbol of Baphomet in its 
"androgyne" form. He who has rejoined the "woman" and has reabsorbed her 
in himself during the work of initiatory reintegration was often conceived, 
even in the East, as the lord of two natures, or as an androgyne. 

In this regard, typical is the distortion behind the charge that the Templars 
used to burn before their idol the children that they begat in sin. All this prob- 
ably amounted to a "baptism of fire," namely, to a heroic-solar initiation that 
was administered to the neophytes who, according to a terminology common 
to all traditions, were regarded as the children of the masters, or as newborns, 
according to their second, spiritual birth. In the coded language of Greek 
mythology, we find the symbol of a goddess, Demeter, who places a baby in the 
fire in order to grant him immortality. This rebirth was symbolized by a belt 
that had to be worn day and night, which every knight received and which had 
to be put on the idol, so that it may become impregnated with a special influ- 
ence. The belt or cord, called ravia in the classical Mysteries, was the mark of 



133 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



the initiates, just as in the Indo-Aryan Orient it used to characterize the higher 
castes of the "twice born" and especially the brahmana caste. The cord is also 
the symbol of the immaterial chain, the connection that invisibly joins together 
all those who have received the same initiation, thus becoming the carriers of 
the same invisible influence. 

The "double fire'* is an image that to a certain degree corresponds to that of 
the "double sword" (see the end of the previous chapter): in the East the doc- 
trine of the double birth of Agni and, in the classical world, the doctrine of the 
double fire (telluric and Uranian), referred to it. One of the main symbols of 
the Templars, the "double torch," leads back to the same idea and comes to* 
gether with a chalice that plays the role of some sort of Grail. The two torches 
already appeared in the Mithraic symbolism in relation to an initiation that 
was especially open to the warrior element 6 

I have already mentioned that Innocent III accused the Templars of culti- 
vating the "doctrine of demons " meaning supernatural sciences. Concerning 
the Templars, they were suspected of practicing black magic and necromancy. 
According to some, they practiced alchemy; even though this probably was not 
the case, the fact remains that some sculptures of the monuments and of the 
tombs of the Templars had astrological-alchemical signs, such as the penta- 
gram and various symbols of planets and metals. In the cycle of the Grail we 
have already encountered elements of this kind. Astrological references abound 
in Wolfram von Eschenbach. Kyot, in order to decipher the texts containing the 
mysteries of the Grail, which can be "read in the stars," first had to learn mag- 
ical characters. The Fisher King sometimes is described as a magician who can 
take many forms at will. The counterpart of Arthur is Merlin the sorceror; in 
Le Morte D'Arthurhe helps Sir Balin pass the test of weapons through the aid 
of a magical force. Finally, we may recall the tradition according to which the 
Grail itself was brought down to earth and guarded by fallen angels, who are 
the equivalent of those demons to whom Innocent III attributed the doctrine 
of Templars, or of the demons to whom some Christianized Celtic texts assim- 
ilated the Tuatha de Danaan (the race "from above " or from Avalon, which was 
the holder of divine sciences). The pentagram, which is found on a Templar 
tomb, is a traditional sign of supernatural sovereignity; in an English Grail text, 
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, the hero of the Grail receives it as a mark, 
while in other texts of the same cycle he consecrates the Sword of the Grail so 
it will not break and thus may retain its virtue. 



6. See my The Path of Enlightenment in the Mithraic Mysteries, trans. Guido Stucco (Edmonds, 
Wash.*. The Alexandrian Press, 1994). 



134 



The Grail and the Knights Templar 



While, on the one hand, the enemies of the Templars tendentiously empha- 
sized the latter's misogyny, on the other hand they accused the initiates of 
breaking the order's vow of chastity and of engaging in homosexual practices. 
Purity and chastity sometimes, though not always, appear also in the cycle of 
the Grail as characteristics required in the predestined hero. I have already in- 
dicated the possibility of bestowing on these concepts a meaning higher than a 
merely sexual and moralistic one. The renunciation of the earthly woman es- 
sentially alludes to the overcoming of desire: Amfortas is doomed by mating 
not with the woman of the Grail but with Orgeluse. In any event, just as the 
kings of the Grail were given a woman, according to Wolfram, while the sim- 
ple knights had to be without one, likewise one may think that while the sim- 
ple Templars practiced ascetic material chastity, the initiates of the Order 
practiced a transcendent chastity. If it is legitimate to refer, in regard to initia- 
tory Templarism, to the views of sexual magic that I have mentioned when 
talking about Amfortas, it would not be difficult to understand what was really 
the case in the charge of "unnatural intercourse." 7 

From all these elements we can easily discern an analogical tie between the 
ideal model of the Grail's chivalry and the inner dimension of historical 
Templarism. On the other hand, the mysterious exhaustion of the source of in- 
spiration of the Grail romances on the eve of the Templars' tragic end and of 
the massive persecutions unleashed by the Inquisition indicates a sort of occult 
syntony even on a more concrete plane. With the destruction of the Order of 
the Knights Templar and with the collapse of the tension that had led to great- 
ness the Ghibelline Middle Ages at the time of Frederick I and Otto the Great, 
what was about to be manifested became invisible again; history departed 
again from what is higher than history. What remained was the myth of the 
Emperor who has not died but whose life is lethargic, and whose seat is an in- 
accessible mountain. In other words, we have a renewal in a new, pessimistic 
sense, of the ancient theme of the awaiting; the cycle of the Grail, which had 
previously assumed this supratraditional theme in positive terms by introduc- 
ing the avenging and restoring hero, ended up reflecting such pessimism. 

Thus, while on the one hand the themes of the Diu Crone still echo the af- 
firming spirit of the period of high tension — since the disappearance of the old 
king and of his court with the Grail marks the fulfilled task and the advent of 
the hero who has succeeded in his mission, who now becomes the new ruler, 



7. See my Eros and the Mysteries of Love: The Metaphysics of Sex, chapter 6. There is a novel by G. 
Meyrink, Der Engle vom westlichen Fenster, which I translated in 1949 into Italian, in which the 
Templar symbol of Baphomet is the central motif; this novel may be helpful to my reader in 
putting into perspective what I have said so far. 



135 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



having at his side the invincible sword — on the other hand, other texts witness 
a very different spirit: that of the redactions of the imperial saga, in which the 
outcome of the "last battle" is negative for the king who has awoken from his 
sleep. This king does not know how to cope with the unleashed forces against 
which he goes to battle; his hanging the shield on the Dry Tree no longer has 
(as in the previously mentioned story) the meaning of a participation in the 
power of the universal empire, but that of an abdication of the regnum and of 
going to heaven. Thus, in the epilogue of Manessier's text, Percival achieves his 
revenge, but then renounces the regal dignity and, taking with him the Grail, 
the sword, and the lance, withdraws to ascetic life. This is the same life that, in 
Wolfram, the brother of the wounded king of the Grail had espoused in order 
to attempt, through a different way from the heroic one, to remedy the decay 
and the pain of his brother, during the period of interregnum and the long 
wait. After Percival dies no one knows whatever happened to the three objects; 
sword, cup, and lance. 

Likewise, in Perceval li Gallois y Percival and his companions withdraw to an 
ascetic life in a seat in which the Grail does not manifest itself anymore. In 
order to lead them to it, the Templars' ship appears, with a red cross on a white 
sail; from then on, no one ever hears again about Percival or the Grail. The 
same theme appears again in the Queste du Graal: a heavenly hand takes the 
Grail and the lance, which are no longer seen after that, while Percival with- 
draws to solitude and dies. In the Titurel, the Grail travels to India, to the 
symbolical kingdom of Prester John. The people around Salvaterre and Mont- 
salvatsche practiced a sinful life, and Montsalvatsche's knights, despite all their 
efforts, cannot change that. Thus the Grail cannot remain in it and must be 
taken where the light arises: a ship, after a fantastic symbolic voyage, carries it 
to India, to the kingdom of Prester John, which is located in "proximity of 
heaven" The Templars travel there, and all of a sudden, the castle of 
Montsalvatsche too is magically transferred here, since nothing sacred must be 
left behind, among the sinful populations. The same Percival assumes the func- 
tion of Prester John, who is the image of the invisible Universal Ruler. Finally, 
in Le Morte D y Arthur> in the sense of some new version of the theme of the 
mortally wounded Arthur who withdraws to Avalon, we find Galahad, who, 
during a period of incarceration, is fed by the Grail and who, having had the 
full view of it, does not attempt to affirm himself and to become its king, but 
rather asks to leave earth; then the angels come to take his soul to heaven. A 
heavenly hand takes the vessel and the lance, and "since then no one can be so 
bold as to say he saw the Sangreal " 8 



S.Le Morte D 'Arthur, 17.21,22. 



136 



The Grail and the Knights Templar 



After the climax represented by the Middle Ages, tradition goes under- 
ground everywhere. A cycle ends. The current of becoming leads further and 
further away from the "Immobile Lands " or from the "Island " Men and entire 
nations at this time precipitate into the most critical phase of that which was 
traditionally referred to as the Dark Age, or Kali Yuga. 9 



9. In Wolfram von Eschenbach, Percival appears to have been conceived as the last of those who 
succeeded to become Lords of the Grail through the heroic path and not through the divine right. 
After the advent of Percival notice is sent to every land that the only person who can achieve the 
Grail is the one called by God and that the Grail cannot be obtained by fighting. By attempting to 
achieve the Grail many people died: this is why the Grail has been hidden ever since. It seems the 
equivalent of traditional prophecy concerning Hesiod's Iron Age, the last or Dark Age, in which the 
heroic path is no longer available. 



137 



25 

The Grail, the Cathars, 
and the Love's Lieges 



The legend of the Grail has historical relationships with troubadour literature, 
and more in particular with the Love's Lieges. Some have considered it a part 
of the medieval genre of chivalric romance. However, it seems that troubadour 
literature had, to a certain extent, an esoteric dimension and secret tendencies; 
this fact has been acknowledged by many Italian scholars, following Luigi 
Valli's studies on Rossetti and Aroux. After hinting at this esotericism, I will 
then indicate how such currents reflec^d analogous influences to those that 
shaped the Grail cycle. 

First of all, there is no doubt that the current of the Love's Lieges often had 
a marked Ghibelline, anti- Catholic, and even heretical character. Aroux had al- 
ready shown how the "gay science" developed mainly in those cities and castles 
of Provence that were also centers of heresy and especially of Catharism. 
Starting from these premises, Aroux tried to identify the secret and sectarian 
content of troubadour literature. Rahn tended to see in Wolfram von 
Eschenbach's narrative a sort of transcription of a Proven 9al story, strictly con- 
nected with the vicissitudes of the Cathars and especially with their castle, 
Montsegur. Personally, I believe that a distinction should be made between the 
Love's Lieges and the Cathars; I also think that the spirit of Catharism in par- 
ticular had indeed very little in common with the spirit of the Grail's 
Templar ism. 

The Cathars also claimed to be the keepers of a superior knowledge and a 
spirituality purer than the Catholic one. They did not acknowledge the 



138 



The Grail, the Cathars, and the Love's Lieges 



supreme authority of the Church and regarded the adoration of the cross to be 
an insult to the divine nature of Christ, even to the point of saying, "May I 
never be saved under this sign." They had Mysteries, which were included in the 
rituals of the manisola and of the consolamentum spiritus sancti, which were 
destined to elevate the members of the community to the rank of the so-called 
Perfect Ones. Overall, their tradition appears to be a dubious mixture of prim- 
itive Christianity, Manicheism, and second-rate Buddhism. 1 Catharism is char- 
acterized by an emphasis on Christian escapism. Its main features (such as 
dualism; the pessimistic denial of the world; the accentuation of the pathos of 
love and renunciation; the impulse to an undetermined liberation; an asceti- 
cism wavering between a "lunar" type and a spiritual exaltation that was car- 
ried to such extremes that some Cathars starved themselves to death, hoping to 
become free from the world, which they conceived as an evil creation of the 
anti-God and as a place of exile) show how distant this tradition was from what 
may be ascribed to a heroic spirituality characterized by strict initiation. This 
does not mean, however, that Catharism was unable to make a contribution to 
the Ghibelline movement, though only indirectly, owing to contingent histor- 
ical reasons, and not because of a true affinity with the soul of the imperial 
myth. 

Provence, the center of Catharism, may be considered one of the main 
places in which, through the Crusades, the transmission of various themes and 
traditional symbols from the Arab-Persian East to the Christian West took 
place. But while in the Grail cycle the positive and virile aspect of an ancient, 
pre-Christian Nordic-Celtic legacy was resurrected, in Catharism what appar- 
ently reemerged was the negative, feminine, gynecocratic aspect, belonging to 
a different pre-Christian legacy, which I have characterized elsewhere as 
"Atlantic-Southern" 2 and which should be considered as an alteration of the 
primordial tradition in the sense of the "cycle of the Mother" 3 While it seems 
that the Cathars borrowed from Manicheism and Buddhism the symbol of 



1. This translator has come across a very interesting study on dualism by Yuri Stoyanov, The 
Hidden Tradition in Europe: The Secret History of Medieval Christian Heresy (London: Penguin, 
1994). 

2. See my Revolt Against the Modern World, chapters 26 and 27. 

3. N. Peyrat, in his Histoire desAlbigeois (Paris, 1880), noticed that in the Provencal cycle the theme 
of the denization of the woman allegedly had two roots, an Iberian and a Christian one. The 
Iberians, like the German, saw in their women some prophetic and divine element. The Iberian 
woman had her own name, which characterized her family; thus one said: "Belissena's children,*' 
or "Imperia's son," or "Olivier as daughter." The husband took second place, like Joseph did to 
Mary, who was almost deified. According to Peyrat, the mariolatric myth was embodied in the type 
of the Cathar woman, the queen of the "empire" of the troubadours' love. 



139 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



mani, a bright stone that brightens the world and eradicates every worldly de- 
sire, this is only a superficial correspondence with the Grail, since the Cathar 
symbol merely had the lunar and religious character of a "jewel of compassion" 
and of "divine love." Catharisnfs opposition to the Church was based on its 
perception of Catholicism as a sort of continuation of the Mosaic religion (ac- 
cording to the Cathars, as also for some Gnostic sects and for Marcion, the God 
of Moses was a god of this earth, opposed to the God of "love"): in other words, 
the Catholic Church was too "Roman" to be the Cathar Church of Love. 

Thus the Crusade against the Cathars had a deeply different meaning from 
the one waged against the Templars. 4 1 have to agree with Peyrat, who, in spite 
of his personal preference, saw in this crusade the struggle of the Roman au- 
thoritarian theocracy allied to the feudal and monarchical northern-Gallic 
France against the democratic, federal, and municipal Hiberic Aquitaine, 
which was the cradle of a knighthood yearning to become emancipated from 
Rome and from northern France. Still, the attack of the Church (in league with 
the Dantean "Giant") against the Cathars, unlike the attack against the Tem- 
plars, targeted an element that was inseparable from the original pathos of true 
Christianity, namely, something that could be characterized as more authenti- 
cally Christian than Roman Catholicism. 

As I was saying, we must be careful not to put the movement of the Love's 
Lieges in a unilateral relation with the Cathars. This movement often presents 
a mainly initiatory and Ghibelline character, although, in comparison with the 
spirit of the Grail cycle, it had an already dissociated form. 

According to tradition, the troubadoric leys d" amors were allegedly found by 
a Briton knight, on the golden branch of an oak on which Arthur's falcon had 
come to rest. This symbolism is notorious, just like that of the golden ring that 
the troubadour received from his lady when he swore her eternal faithfulness. 
In Provence, as a way to consecrate this ritual, the Virgin was invoked; in 
Germany the minnesingers invoked that Frau Saelde whom we have previously 
known to be the guardian of Arthur's kingdom and the one who favors and 
supports the conquest of the Grail. 

In this type of literature, "woman" and "love" have a symbolic character that 
is even more evident than that found in the various women and queens de- 
scribed in the Grail texts and in chivalric literature, becoming the center of 
every event. In this case, the symbolism did not have to exclude a concrete as- 
pect, connected to a special, divergent way of spiritual realization, in which the 
exhilaration and desire aroused by a real woman (who would be conceived and 



4. Interestingly enough, Bernard of Clairvaux, who notoriously sympathized with the Templars, 
deplored the spread of Catharism. 



140 



The Grail, the Cathars, and the Love's Lieges 



experienced through a sort of evocative process, as the incarnation of a vivify- 
ing and transfiguring force transcending her person) could play a role or act as 
a starting point. 

In regard to this I will refer my reader to another work of mine, Eros and the 
Mysteries of Love: The Metaphysics of Sex. Here I will only emphasize that the 
goal of this path was, generally speaking, the same of every initiation. Jaques de 
Baisieux, a Provencal Love's Liege, said this expressedly when he identified love 
as the destruction of death, by saying, "A senefie en sa patie sans, et mor sene- 
fie mort; — or Pasemblons, s'aurons sans mort"; for him, lovers, or those who 
have obtained love, are "those who do not die" or "those who will live in an- 
other era of glory and joy." That the "literature of love" often had a secret con- 
tent can be clearly seen in more than one hint dropped by the authors 
themselves. Francesco da Barberino, for instance, cautioned against "coarse 
people," and wrote: "I hereby state and declare that all of my works dealing with 
love have a spiritual sense and that not all of them can be understood by every- 
body." His "Documents of Love" are marked by the eloquent figure of a war- 
rior with a sword in his hands, from whose mouth comes this significant 
sentence: "I am vigor and I am watching out for somebody to come and open 
any of these books; and if one is not qualified to read them, I will strike him in 
the chest with this sword " This was a caveat to the profane reader: it repre- 
sented a defense of a secret doctrine that recalls an aspect of the defense of the 
Grail. 

Valli has shown that the women of the Love's Lieges, no matter whether 
their names were Rose or Beatrice, Johanna or Selvaggia, beginning with 
Dante, Cavalcanti, Dino Compagni, and the poets of Sicily's courts, including 
Frederick II, must be regarded as the same woman. According to this scholar, 
this woman represents secret doctrine, which is protected by a group of people 
joined together in an invisible bond and by a militant attitude that was, for the 
most part, opposed to the Church. This is undoubtedly an aspect of this sym- 
bolism. Here are some examples: Dante's love, at one point, is revealed as love 
for "Holy Wisdom." His woman, Beatrice, confers upon him initiatory free- 
dom — not only is Dante's soul "separated from his body" through her, but once 
in Paradise, "her sun" obscures "Christ's sun." Dino Compagni wrote: "The lov- 
ing Lady Intelligence, who dwells in the human soul, caused me to fall in love 
with her beauty." And also: "You who have subtle knowledge, love the queen 
Intelligence, who dwells in the presence of God. She is a woman of great value, 
who nourishes the soul and pacifies the heart; those who serve her will never 
go astray." 

Cavalcanti related "such a beautiful woman, whom the mind cannot under- 
stand" with the statement "Your salvation has appeared." The love of Guido 



141 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



Guinizelli was for a woman who should "bestow truth, as the Intelligence from 
heaven." In the Jugement d' Amour, in which we find Blancheflor, who appeared 
as one of PercivaPs women, mention is made of the "mysteries of love," which 
should not be revealed to "cowardly, indiscreet, and vulgar people" and should 
be reserved for "clerics and knights." Finally, Arnaldo Daniello, whom Petrarch 
called "Great Master of Love," claims that if he could have his woman, he would 
love her "ten thousand times more than a hermit or a monk loves God." From 
all this we sense the theme that secretly informed this literature and to which 
one should refer even where it is less visible and more hidden behind poetic 
and pathetic expressions. Likewise, as I have said, we must also consider an- 
other, more concrete aspect, typical of a special "way of sex " in which the rap- 
ture and exaltation of Eros played a technical role, as the support of initiatory 
realization. Hence a difference in regard to the realizations not only of an in- 
tellectual and ascetic nature but also of a heroic, action-oriented nature (as in 
chivalry and the "path of the warrior"). 

As in the cycle of the Grail, in the Love's Lieges too we find the theme of the 
woman as widow. Francesco da Barberino spoke of a mysterious widow ("I am 
telling you, very openly, that there was and is a certain widow who was not wid- 
owed"), whom he allegedly met and thanks to whom he found again his strength. 
She is the Veve Dame, who was also Percival's mother and who, in a version of 
the legend, is the carrier of the Grail (her name, Philosophine, may correspond, 
in one of her aspects, to Lady Intelligence). She is also the widow or solitary 
queen who was often freed and married by some knights in the Grail sagas. Thus 
even a Love's Liege seeks that wisdom or tradition that does not have, or no 
longer has, a husband (Le,, the widow) and that alone gives strength. 5 

Again, in regard to the initiatory aspect, the Love's Lieges knew many de- 
grees. Nicolo de Rossi arranged the "degrees and the virtue of true love" ac- 
cording to a hierarchical ladder that goes from liquefatio [melting] to languor 
[feebleness], to studium [zeal], and finally to extasim [ecstasy], which dicitur 
excessus mentis [is referred to an excess of the mind], namely, to a suprarational 
experience. In Francesco da Barberino we find a figure of Love with roses, ar- 
rows, and a white horse, next to twelve sleeping figures, who represent twelve 
virtues or degrees in a hierarchy that introducit in Amoris curiam (penultimate 
degree) and that finally culminates in "eternity." 6 Here we find again the 



5. In the Diu Crone we find the following variation on the theme of the widow: in the Grail's court 
the king and his knights are all dead, though they retain a semblance of life; on the contrary, the 
Grail carrier and her maidens are really alive; God has left the Grail in their care during the inter- 
regnum until the hero comes. 

6, L. Valli, in his II linguaggio segreto di Dante e del Fedeli d'Amore (Rome, 1928), wrote: 
"These figures are: first Meekness, who data novitiis notitia vitlorum, docet illos ab illorum vilitate 



142 




The Grail, the Cathars, and the Love's Lieges 



symbolism of the horse, in reference to the principle of "non-death*' (a-mor): 
concerning the four arrows and the roses, they obviously correspond to the 
double power to kill or pierce and to resuscitate ("to blossom again"), which is 
among those attributed to the Grail or its lance. Moreover, it is as a "perennial 
rose" that Dante clearly symbolizes the vision of the superworld, thus teaching 
us what one must think of women who ostensibly are named Rose, who were 
celebrated, almost to the point of monotony especially in the literature pro- 
duced in Ghibelline milieus, such as that of Frederick II's court, beginning with 
the Emperor himself. 

In regard to the other, opposite aspect of the "love" principle, that it may act 
in a destructive fashion, here we find again the Grail theme of being wounded, 
not only by darts, but also by a lance. In Jacques de Baisieux we read: "Love, 
who is not slow in recognizing his lieges, flies to him with whom a lady is in 
love, wounds him with his lance, strikes him in such a way as to tear his heart 
out of his chest, and then carries it to his lady" According to the same author, 
who does not hesitate to declare that the first and most noble of Love's Lieges 
were the knights of Arthur and of the Grail, Love wants his lieges to "be armed 
for a fight, because he wants to break and bring down the arrogance of the 
proud, of those who are hostile to him." These "proud" people will be pierced 
by him with a lance, just as Amfortas was pierced for having become Orgeluse's 
lover. Cavalcanti says of Love that it arouses "the mind that was asleep," 
(i.e.,that it causes an initiatory awakening), but also that it slays the heart and 
makes the soul tremble, just as Dante says, before the vision of the woman, that 
he "made an effort not to fall" and that his "heart died though I was still alive." 7 
All these expressions, together with many other analogies, which are often re- 
ferred to the effect of an enigmatic "greeting" from the woman, makes us think 
of the effects of transcendent experiences, similar to that of the already men- 
tioned Templar witness, instead of appearing as heroic transpositions of emo- 
tions of love. 



abstinere; this docilitas that is bestowed upon the novices is clearly the initiatory virtue. Others fol- 
low: Industriousness, who makes some strange purses in which one hides precious things. The 
third virtue is Perseverance, the fourth Discretion, the fifth Patience, the sixth Hope, the seventh 
Prudence, quae te docet custodire quaesita; the eighth is Glory, the ninth Justice, quae male custodi- 
entem quaesita punit> which is sent by Love to punish those who do not keep the secret and are 
found unworthy of such great honor; the tenth is Innocence, which signifies the condition of those 
who serve Love in a worthy and honorable manner; the eleventh is Gratitude, who introducit in 
Amoris curiam; the last is Eternity, which promises eternal life. 
7. Vita Nova I, 2. 



143 



26 

Dante and the Love's Lieges 
as a Ghibelline Militia 



The Templars' battle cry was "Long Live God Holy Love!" In Jacques de 
Baisieux, the lord of the "land of love" was called Holy Love, who was one and 
the same with God himself, since the land of love was identified with the in- 
alienable "heavenly region " which was opposed to all contingent earthly lands. 
Moreover, the Love's Lieges displayed the traits of a fighting militia, as they 
were endowed with weapons and secret accords of their own. Ricolfi, after say- 
ing that "they must not reveal the secrets of Love, but conceal them as best as 
they can," added that "they must cooperate in their wills, words, and deeds" In 
Francesco da Barberino, the Court of Love was represented as a heavenly curia 
of the elect, arranged in a hierarchical fashion, with angels in correspondence 
to each degree; considering what I have already mentioned about the bird as a 
symbol, this figuration (which recalls the castle of the Grail as a "spiritual 
palace" and "castle of souls") does not have a different meaning from that of 
the Court of Love that is composed entirely of birds, which from time to time 
speak there* Moreover, da Barberino was a soldier and an ardent supporter of 
the Ghibelline cause, who joined the army of Henry VII (1308-13). The most 
characteristic Italian love poets were either moderate or radical Ghibellines, 
some with the scent of heresy, others undoubtedly heretics; and although they 
exalted women and spoke of love, they were men of action, of struggle, of war 
and faction. 

Troubadours such as Guillaume Figueira and Guillaume Anelier, who sur- 
vived the Crusade against the Cathars, sided enthusiastically with the Emperor, 



144 



Dante and the Love's Lieges as a Ghibelline Militia 



launching bitter attacks against the Church. Even Andrea Cappellano's treatise 
was solemnly condemned by the Church in 1277, despite a visible lack of good 
reasons. 1 Dante, who in his Divine Comedy used as a central symbol the seal of 
the Templars* Grand Master (i.e., the eagle and cross), traveled to Paris just 
when the great tragedy of the Templars unfolded, without telling anyone and 
without anyone ever learning the reasons for this trip. 

From these elements, and from many other similar ones, one can suppose 
that the Love's Lieges, besides constituting an initiatory chain, also had their 
own organization, which supported the cause of the Empire and opposed the 
Church. Not only were they the custodians of a secret doctrine, which was not 
compatible with the more exoteric Catholic teachings, but they were also peo- 
ple who militated against the hegemonistic claims of Rome's Curia. 

This was the thesis endorsed by Rossetti and Aroux, taken up by Valli and to 
a degree by Ricolfi and, more recently, by Alessandrini, though with a heavy 
emphasis on the merely political dimension. On this basis, the above- 
mentioned symbolism could allow a further interpretation. The symbol of the 
woman as the safekeeper of the doctrine must be applied to the same organi- 
zation. Laws of love, such as the one stating that "the woman who has received 
and accepted from the perfect lover the gifts of Massenia, namely, gloves and 
mystical cordon, 2 must give herself to him, least she be regarded a prostitute" 
are supposed to be formulas of faithfulness or militant solidarity, and so forth. 
The woman who according to Dante usurps Beatrice's (that is, Holy Wisdom's) 
role, forcing her to go in exile, is the Catholic Church's exotericism, which has 
forcibly replaced the "true doctrine"; this is the meaning of the "petrifying 
stone" that encloses the woman Petra alive. 

In this regard, there are some significant figurations by da Barberino. In that 
figuration with the fourteen figures who, arranged in couples, form seven hi- 
erarchical degrees, we can see that the lower degrees are constituted by the "re- 
ligious" element, corresponding to a "cadaver" which reproduces Dante's view 
of the stone as synonymous with death. The representatives of the ecclesiasti- 
cal hierarchy, compared to the Love's Lieges, are secular and far from possess- 
ing a vivifying knowledge, or the true woman, or the Widow, who corresponds 
to the higher degrees, or to the "deserving knight" who has the "rose" and "life" 



1. In this treatise we find again the image of the center; moreover, maxims such as "Love hardly 
lasts when it is divulgated" and "He who does not know how to conceal does not know how to 
love" also reflect the conduct that was expected from a member of a secret organization. 

2. The cordon recalls the one worn by the Templars; concerning the gloves, we may recall here the 
adventure found in the Diu Crone in which they were related to the help provided by Saelde to the 
Grail seekers who have successfully completed a preliminary test. The glove also plays an impor- 
tant role in Masonic ritual 



145 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



while the former know only "death." 3 We may suppose that these higher de- 
grees constituted the same suprareligious mystery to which the Templars were 
admitted only after rejecting the cross, and which in the cycle of the Round 
Table was represented by the Grail as a super and extraeucharistic mystery. 

In the same literature are some reliable references to historical events about 
the Love's Lieges as a militia and as a Ghibelline organization. One of the most 
significant documents is another illustration by da Barberino, in which we find 
the representation of the tragic victory of Death over Love. Death shoots an 
arrow at a woman, who is portrayed in the act of falling down, pierced. Next to 
her is Love, divided in two parts, the left one whole, the right one fragmented. 
Here I subscribe to Vallfs interpretation according to which Death is the 
Church and the pierced woman is the organization of the Love's Lieges. 4 As far 
as the bipartite figure of Love is concerned, its broken part corresponds to the 
wounded woman, that is, to the external and persecuted part of the organiza- 
tion, while its left side represents the invisible part of the organization, which, 
despite all, continued to exist. Moreover, in traditional symbolism, the left side 
was often related to what is occult and unmanifested. 

At this point I will briefly consider the ultimate and general meaning of the 
movement of the Love's Lieges in relation to the spirit of the Grail cycle and of 
the other traditions connected with it. 

We may allow for a certain continuity or interference between the plane of 
an organization's secret, initiatory doctrine and the plane of its militant 
Ghibelline orientation. However, as I have already said about the Love's Lieges, 
this may well be an already dissociated form, mainly for two reasons. First, the 
action they promoted was militant and political, and not an action assumed as 
the basis for a spiritual or initiatory realization, as in the knightly and heroic 
path in general and as in the ideal orientation of the Templar movement. I have 
noted that, in regard to the initiatory dimension, the members of that tradition 
and organization were supposed to follow the "path of love." 

Second, as we analyze the background of the Love's Lieges' initiation, we no- 
tice that the woman, in her appearance in the form of Holy Wisdom, Lady 
Intelligence, or gnosis (as Valli and others have noted), suggests an essentially 
sapiential and contemplative plane, which is not disjoined from an ecstatic el- 



3. The fact that da Barberino indicates somewhere else that members of religious orders are those 
who deserve "celestem curiam introire" [to enter into the heavenly curia] does not represent a re- 
cantation, as Ricolfi suggests; rather, we may think that this is a reference to those members of re- 
ligious orders who were able to go beyond the more external and exoteric dimension of their faith. 

4. Dante talks about Beatrice's scattered limbs, meaning the various surviving groups of the 
organization. 



146 



Dante and the Love's Lieges as a Ghibelline Militia 



ement; Dante's intellectual horizon confirms this. Thus we may think that if in 
these groups the religious attitude of those who merely "believe" was over- 
come, one nevertheless remained in the sphere of a sort of Platonizing ini- 
tiation and did not orient himself in the sense of a "regal" initiation that 
included the warrior and the sacral elements in a unity, as in the symbols of the 
Lord of the Two Swords, of the resurrection of the imperator and the king of 
the Grail. This is to say that the Ghibellinism of the Love's Lieges lacked a spir- 
itual counterpart that was truly congenial; this I why I have referred to it as a 
"dissociated form " even though in some regards it perpetuated, as a secret or- 
ganization, the previous or parallel tradition. 

This consideration leads us to the historical plane; we may wonder if the 
antiecclesiastical character of this organization was merely contingent and not 
really connected to a true overcoming of Catholicism. In fact, within orthodox 
Catholicism there was room for a realization of a contemplative and more or 
less Platonic type; moreover, many dogmas and symbols of the apostolic tradi- 
tion were susceptible to be vivified on its basis. 5 Moreover, there are reasons to 
believe that the Love's Lieges were quite open, at least in principle, to a purified 
and dignified Catholicism and that Dante's stone had nothing to do with the 
Grail, but that it merely alluded to the Catholic Church of which Peter was the 
cornerstone. When he said that this stone, which was previously white, had 
turned black, apparently he alluded to its corruption, owing to which the 
Church had become some kind of tomb of Christ's live doctrine, of which she 
was supposed to be the pure repository. Thus the Love's Lieges opposed the 
Church not because they represented an essentially different tradition but be- 
cause, according to them, the Church was no longer worthy of the pure 
Christian doctrine. 6 

If this is true, then Dante and the Love's Lieges should not be put on the 
same level as the Grail's knights. The Widow whom they talked about would 
not have been the solar tradition of the Empire, but an already weakened and 
lunar tradition, which therefore would not have been totally irreconcilable with 
the premises of a renewed Catholicism. An indirect proof of this is Dante's view 
of the relationship between the Church and the Empire. 



5. There is a good book by R. L. John, Dante (Vienna, 1947), in which the author tries to adduce 
many proofs of Dante's membership in the Templar organization, which he did not consider to be 
incompatible with Catholic doctrine. Interesting enough, this book was published with an ecclesi- 
astical imprimatur. 

6. In this regard, we also should not exclude the influence of Joachimism, centered on the idea of 
a new ecclesia spiritualis, which corresponds to a new era of Christianity, with the prophecy of the 
advent of an "angelic pope," who was the mystical -ecclesiastical counterpart of the prophecy con- 
cerning the "new Frederick." 



147 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



As I have said before, Dante's view is centered on a limiting dualism and on 
a polarity between contemplative life and active life. Now, if starting from this 
dualism Dante bitterly attacked the Church for those aspects in which it did 
not confine itself to the pure contemplative life, becoming greedy for earthly 
powers and goods, denying in the process the Empire's supreme right in the di- 
mension of active life, and worse yet, attempting to usurp the Empire's prerog- 
atives, then it logically follows that on the basis of the same premises, Dante 
should have cultivated an equal aversion for the opposite tendency, namely, for 
any attempt on the part of the Empire to totally affirm its own dignity in the 
same spiritual domain to which the Church laid exclusive claims; a right, we 
should recall, that Dante granted it. In other words, Dante should have op- 
posed radical Ghibellinism and the transcendent view of the imperium in the 
same way he opposed Guelphism, and this because of an initial theory that is 
"heterodox," not so much from the point of view of a purified Catholicism but 
from the point of view of the primordial tradition of "regal" spirituality. 

Therefore, against the tendency of some people to overvalue Dante's "eso- 
tericism " and despite the effective presence of this esotericism in many of his 
views, on the plane that I am discussing, Dante emerges much more as a poet 
and a fighter than as a man upholding an uncompromising doctrine. He dis- 
plays too much passion and too much factionalism in his militant temporal 
views, while he tends to be much too Christian and contemplative in the spir- 
itual domain. Hence, many of his confusions and oscillations, such as his con- 
fining Frederick II in hell, while at the same time defending the Templars 
against Philip the Fair. Generally speaking, everything seems to suggest that, in 
spite of everything, Dante used the Catholic tradition as his starting point, 
which he endeavored to elevate to a relatively initiatory {i.e., suprareligious) 
plane instead of being directly connected to the representatives of traditions 
that were superior to and predated both Christianity and Catholicism. Some of 
these traditions, for instance, would include the main sources of inspiration in 
the cycle of the Grail and of the Hermetic tradition. 

Thus, when we consider the Love's Lieges, we should see in it a Ghibelline 
group with an initiatory character, and as such endowed with a higher knowl- 
edge than the Church's orthodox doctrine, yet upholding an already weakened 
and compromised view of the Imperial idea. Thus the most positive aspect of 
the current is that the Court of Love assumes the character of an immaterial 
kingdom and that the Lieges are individual personalities committed to a supra- 
rational and ecstatic realization. In a certain way, this ideally corresponds to a 
pessimistic conclusion of the Grail legend, namely, to the Grail that becomes 
invisible again and to the Percival who abdicates to become an ascetic. It is es- 
pecially in this form that tradition was preserved in the following period, in- 



148 



Dante and the Love's Lieges as a Ghibelline Militia 



creasingly divesting itself of the militant aspect and sometimes revivifying 
deeper and more original currents. 

As far as the movement of the Love's Lieges is concerned, in Italy it lasted up 
to the time of Boccaccio and Petrarch, though it assumed increasingly human- 
istic traits, until the artistic aspect eventually prevailed over the esoteric one. 
Then the symbols were transformed into mere allegories, their meaning no 
longer understood even by those who continued to employ them in their 
poems. During the early seventeenth century the vital principle of tradition ap- 
pears to have been totally extinguished, not only overall, but also in individual 
authors. For a relative continuation one must refer to other groups and to other 
currents. 



149 



27 

The Grail and the 
Hermetic Tradition 



I have devoted an entire book to the Hermetic tradition, aimed at showing the 
essentially symbolic character of what in a very complex and abstruse literature 
was superficially known as alchemy and as alchemical procedures, aimed at pro- 
ducing Gold and the Philosophers Stone, 1 1 refer my readers to that work, in case 
they wish to gain a deeper understanding of Hermetic-alchemical doctrines: 
here, I will limit myself to indicating some of their themes that reproduce those 
of the mystery of the Grail and of initiat9ry regality, though in other forms. 

In regard to the historical dimension, the Hermetic- alchemical tradition ap- 
peared in the West at the time of the Crusades: it reached its peak between the 
thirteenth and the sixteenth centuries, and it lasted up to the eighteenth cen- 
tury, interfering, in these last developments, with Rosicrucianism. And yet the 
origins of the Hermetic tradition can be traced to an even more distant past. 
Between the seventh and twelfth centuries it was known among the Arabs, who 
became the instruments of the revival, in the medieval West, of the older legacy 
of the pre-Christian wisdom tradition. In effect, the Arab and Syriac Hermetic- 
alchemical texts were inspired by texts of the Alexandrian and Byzantine pe- 
riod (third to fifth centuries); these texts, while representing the oldest 
testimonies from a historical and scientific point of view, must have gathered 
and transmitted older traditions that had been previously preserved in oral 
forms of a strict initiatory transmission. 



1. Julius Evola, The Hermetic Tradition, trans. E. E. Rhemus (Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions, 1994). 



150 



The Grail and the Hermetic Tradition 



The Hellenistic texts refer to all kinds of authors, both real and imaginary, 
of pre-Christian antiquity. Though they have a scant scientific basis, they have 
the meaning of a symptom or of the confused perception of a truth. 

First of all> the tradition claims to be the repository of a secret, regal, and 
priestly knowledge, or of a mystery that according to Olympiodorus was re- 
served for the higher castes, kings, wise men, and priests. The prevailing term 
became ars regia, or Royal Art. 

Through imaginary and sometimes extravagant references, the tradition of 
the Royal Art was traced to the Egyptian tradition (under classical-pagan dis- 
guises it was traced to Hermes, who was regarded as the forefather or teacher 
of Egyptian kings) and to the Iranian tradition. According to Synesius and to 
the Democritean Texts, it was the science already known to Egyptian kings and 
Persian seers. Mention was made not only of Zarathustra but also of Mithras, 
who together with Osiris characterized certain phases of the "divine opus" We 
may recall here that it was in ancient Egypt and Iran that the tradition of "solar 
regality" was established in typical forms. 

The Hellenistic alchemical texts talk about an ancient and immaterial stock 
that enjoyed total freedom and was without kings. A medieval text claimed that 
alchemy was known in antediluvian times. Another ancient author attributed 
it to the "first of the angels " who mated with Isis. Thus Isis came to learn the 
science, which was revealed to Horus. Here the theme of the divine woman and 
the restoring hero (Horus, who avenges the dead and dismembered Osiris) is 
confusedly but also significantly associated with biblical reminiscences con- 
cerning the angels who descended on earth and with their stock, which ac- 
cording to tradition had been (before the flood) a stock of "glorious" or 
"famous beings." This suggests the presence of elements of the primordial tra- 
dition that were preserved during the ascending, solar, or heroic cycle of civi- 
lizations, such as the Egyptian or the Iranian ones. These forms later assumed 
a mysteric form, mixing with other elements and assuming the Hermetic- 
alchemical disguise, along with the employment of a symbolism derived from 
classic mythology and astrology. 

The Hermetic doctrine, per se much older than Christianity and alien to the 
latter's spirit, thanks to its clever and impenetrable metallurgic disguise, was 
able to perpetuate itself during historical periods dominated by Islam and 
Catholicism, without being forced to borrow from those religions any external 
elements and without undergoing significant deviations. The references to 
Christianity found in Western medieval texts prove to be superficial and ex- 
trinsic, much more so than those found in the Grail cycle; the classical-pagan 
element remains very visible, even in the external forms. It was only in a later 
period that the interference with Rosicrucianism led to a mixture of the 



151 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



Hermetic symbols with those derived from some sort of Christian esotericism 
sharing some common traits with the Love's Lieges tradition. From these con- 
siderations we learn that the Hermetic tradition, in its Western positive docu- 
mentation, historically encompassed a period much wider than the initiatory 
and knightly cycle that I previously discussed. In this context I wish to consider 
the phase that historically emerged as a current. This current, after emerging 
in the West in the same period as the Grail cycle and the Love's Lieges, outlived 
these cycles, thus establishing a continuity characterized by the correspondence 
of some fundamental symbols. I will now briefly discuss some of these 
symbols: 

1. The mystery of the Royal Art is strictly related to that of the heroic rein- 
tegration. This is explicitly stated, for instance, in a text of Cesare della Riviera 
(1605), in which the central theme consists in the identification of the "Heroes" 
with those who succeed in conquering the "second Tree of Life" and in intro- 
ducing a second "earthly paradise," an image of the primordial center. This cen- 
ter, like the Grail's castle, "does not appear to base and impure souls, but 
remains hidden in the celestial spheres of the inaccessible light of the heavenly 
Sun. It shows itself only to the 'happy' magical hero, who alone gloriously 
possesses it, enjoying the salvific Tree of Life, located in the middle of this 



universe." 2 



In Basil Valentine we find the same theme, namely, the quest for the center 
of the Tree, which is located in the middle of the "earthly paradise." This quest 
begins with the quest for the material of the Opus Magnum, which implies a 
brutal fight. We have previously learned that access to the Grail's castle, where 
according to the Titurel the Golden Tfee is located, can be attained with 
weapons in hand. The "material" pursued in the Hermetic tradition is often 
identified with the "stone" (in Wolfram and in other authors, the "stone" is the 
Grail); the second operation described by Basil Valentine is destined to find in 
this material the blood of the lion as well as the ashes of the eagle. The mean- 
ing of these two symbols, which are also characteristic of the Ghibelline- 
knightly cycle, should be rather clear after what I have discussed. 3 

2. The regal symbolism played a fundamental role in medieval and post- 
medieval Hermetic texts, and was closely associated with the symbolism of 
gold. This association can be traced back to the ancient Egyptian tradition. One 



2. Cesare della Riviera, II mondo magico degli heroi, 14. Compare this hero with the symbolism of 
Saelde, who protects the Grail's heroes; this symbolism personifies the quality of "being happy," 
namely, of succeeding in an adventure. 

3. Della Riviera, among the effects of the heroic realization, mentions invincibility, or becoming 
similar to a "terrible lion" and to a god who is honored on earth "among the regal disciples of the 
most high Jupiter" 



152 



The Grail and the Hermetic Tradition 



of the old titles bestowed on the pharaoh was "Golden Horus"; As the god 
Horus, the king was seen as an incarnation of the restoring solar deity. Being 
made of gold signified his immortality and incorruptibility, and, at the same 
time, alluded to a primordial state, namely to the age which among many peo- 
ple was characterized by this metal. Thus, in Hermeticism too the terms Gold, 
Sun, and King were regarded as synonymous and used interchangeably. Aside 
from this, the development of the Opus Hermeticum was often portrayed in the 
form of a sick king who eventually heals; or of a king or a knight laying in a 
coffin or a tomb who is finally resurrected; or of an old and decrepit man who 
gains back vigor and youth; or of a king who is stricken, sacrificed, or killed, 
but who later acquires a higher life and a stronger power than any man who 
preceded him. These are analogous themes to those of the mystery of the Grail. 

3. The medieval Hermetic texts contain plenty of references to Saturn, who, 
like Osiris, is the king of the Golden Age, an age that is notoriously related to 
the primordial tradition. See for instance the very significant title of a small 
work by Gino of Barma; Saturn's Kingdom Transformed into the Golden Age, In 
Hermeticism the theme of a primordial state that needs to be reawakened takes 
the form of the production of gold through the transformation of Saturn's 
metal, lead, in which it is hidden. In a hieroglyphic drawn by Basil Valentine we 
can see crowned Saturn atop a complex symbol that represents the overall 
Hermetic Work. Beneath Saturn is the symbol of sulfur, which in turn contains 
the symbol of resurrection, the Phoenix. 4 According to Philalethes, the wise 
find the missing element in Saturn's race, after adding the needed sulfur: here 
the key is provided by the double meaning of the Greek term Qeiov which 
means both "sulfur" and "divine." Moreover, sulfur is often the equivalent of 
fire, the active and vivifying principle of the Hermetic tradition. In the 
Hellenistic texts we find the theme of the sacred black stone, the power of 
which is stronger than any spell. This stone, in order to be truly regarded as 
"our Gold," "namely Mithras," and to produce the "great Mithraic mystery," 
must possess the right power or the "medicine of the right action"; this is just 
another way to express the mystery of awakening and of reintegration. What 
we have here is a further parallelism with the themes of the Grail: symbols of a 
primordial regality and of a stone that await a virile and divine power (sulfur 
= divine) in order to be manifested as "gold" and as the "philosopher's stone" 
endowed with the medicinal power to destroy every "illness." 

4. On this basis it would be possible to interpret the mysterious term lapsit 
exillis, employed by Wolfram in reference to the Grail, as the lapis elixir, thus 
acknowledging a correspondence between the Grail and the divine or heavenly 



4. See J. Evola, The Hermetic Tradition, 79-83. 



153 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



stone described in Hermetic texts: the latter has also been perceived as an elixir 
or as a principle that renews itself and bestows eternal life, health, and victory. 
When we read in a text by Kitab-el-Focul, "The stone speaks but you heed it 
not: it calls to you and you answer not! O you sleepers! What deafness stops 
your ears? What vise grips your hearts and minds?" we cannot help but think 
about the question associated with the Grail that the hero at first does not pon- 
der, but that later on he poses, thus fulfilling his task. The Hermetic philoso- 
phers seek their "stone" just like the knights seek the Grail, or the heavenly 
stone. When Zacharias wrote "Our body, which is our occult stone, cannot be 
known nor seen without inspiration . . . without this body our science is vain," 5 
he reproduced, like many other authors, the theme of the invisibility and of the 
mysterious location of the Grail, which is reserved for those who are either 
called or led to it, following an inspiration or a fortuitous coincidence. 

The theme that the stone is not a stone and that this knowledge should be 
understood in a mystical rather than in a physical sense goes back to the 
Hellenistic age; it appears in several Hermetic texts and it recalls the immater- 
ial nature of the Grail which, according to previously mentioned authors, is not 
made of gold, stone, horn, or any other known material. In Arabic Hermetic 
texts, the quest for the stone is significantly connected to the themes of the 
mountain (i.e., Monsalvatsche), of the Woman, and of virility. "The stone that 
is not made of stone, and which does not have the nature of a stone" could be 
found on top of the highest mountain: from it, it is possible to obtain arsenic, 
that is, virility. (Due to the double meaning of the Greek word dposviKdv, in 
the Hermetic tradition "arsenic" has often been employed as the symbol of the 
virile principle which is synonymous to thkt active sulfur that needs to be added 
to Saturn as Philalethes suggests.) Beneath arsenic we find its "bride," mercury, to 
which it is joined. I will expand on this matter further on. For now, I wish to re- 
call that according to one of its most recurrent themes, the Royal Art of the 
Hermetists is focused on a "stone" that is often identified with Saturn; this stone 
contains the phoenix, the elixir, the gold, or "Our King" at the latent state. 
Moreover, I also wish to recall that the "strange and terrible mystery that was 
transmitted to the disciples of king Hermes" and to the "Heroes" who try to find 
their way to the "earthly paradise" through "fierce fighting " consists in destroy- 
ing that state of latency often referred to as "death" or "disease" or "impurity" or 
"imperfection," through operations of an initiatory character. 

5. Finally, I wish to mention the mysterium coniunctionis. The union of the 
"male" with the "female," as per the teachings of the Hellenistic texts, is an es- 
sential part of the Hermetic Work. The "male" is the Sun, Sulfur, Fire, Arsenic. 
This principle must be turned from a passive into a "living and active" one. For 

5. De la philosophie naturelle des metaux, 502, 

154 



The Grail and the Hermetic Tradition 



this to happen it must be joined with the feminine principle, which is called the 
"Woman of the Hermetic philosophers" their "Fountain" or "Divine Water" or, 
in the metallurgical symbolism, "mercury" Here we find in a very explicit way 
the hidden role that the Woman played in several parts of the chivalrous liter- 
ature and of the literature of the Love's Lieges. In the words of Delia Riviera she 
is "our Hebes," connected with the "second Tree of Life," who bestows to the 
Heroes the "natural [i.e., Olympian] beatitude of the soul and bodily immor- 
tality." She often corresponds to the "Water of Life." Moreover, Hermeticism 
points out her dangerous side, which — like the Grail, like the spear or the sec- 
ond sword — may destroy those who join her without being able to take their 
own "gold" or "fire" (namely the principle of personality and of the heroic 
force) beyond their natural limit. The wedding, the union with the Woman, 
may turn out to be harmful unless it is preceded by a radical purification. 
Mercury, or the Philosophers' Woman, while being Water of Life, has also the 
character of a "thunderbolt," of a "fiery poison that dissolves everything" and 
that "burns and kills everything"; thus, the "Fire of the philosophers" that it 
generates, is applied to a symbolism that is also used in the Grail cycle: the 
sword, the lance, the axe, or everything that breaks and wounds. 

In this context, we should recall the interesting allegories found in a 
Hermetic- Rosicrucian work by J. V. Andreae, namely The Chemical Wedding of 
Christian Rosenkreuz. Here we need to note two things. First, the presence of 
some trials (of which it is said: "It is better to run away than to face that which 
is beyond one's strength") that are overcome only by warriors and by those 
who, not trusting their might, have proven to be free of pride. Secondly, men- 
tion is made of a fountain, next to which lies a lion, which suddenly grabs a 
sword and breaks it in half, and which calms down only when a dove gives it 
an olive branch, which it devours. The lion, the sword, and the dove too are 
found in the symbolism of the Grail cycle. The sword, the symbol of pure war- 
rior strength, is broken by the unleashed power connected to the fountain. The 
crisis ends only thanks to the dove, which is a bird sacred to Diana (Diana is 
one of the Hermetic names designating the Philosophers' Woman) and some- 
times associated, in the Grail tales, with the mystery of the renewal of the 
strength of the Grail itself. Once again we have the allusion to a realization be- 
yond ordinary virility and the "crisis of contact." 

I will not discuss at length here the various phases of the Hermetic Work. 
What matters at this point is only to indicate two essential symbols that char- 
acterize the fulfillment of this work, the period of initiation. The first symbol 
is the Rebis, or the Androgynous, based on erotic symbolism and on the sym- 
bolism of the "occult wedding " We have previously encountered this symbol- 
ism among the Templars and the Love's Lieges. The second symbol is the color 



155 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



red, the regal color (e.g., the "purple tiara" of the Imperator), which is super- 
ordained to the color white, the latter being used to characterize a preliminary 
ecstatic and even "lunar" phase of the Work (in this phase the Woman plays a 
dominating role) that eventually needs to be overcome. Red corresponds to the 
initiatory regality. A parallel symbol for the overall Work used by Philalethes is 
that of the "access to the closed palace of the King"; this is almost the counter- 
part to the access to Montsalvatsche's castle, just as the healing virtue of the 
stone and of the Hermetic-alchemical elixir is almost a parallel to the healing 
or awakening of the Grail's fallen king and of other corresponding symbols. 

Having said that, we may wonder what was the meaning of the Hermetic 
tradition in the West. I have to repeat what I have said before. The Ars Regia y or 
Royal Art, witnesses a secret current of initiation, the virile, "heroic," and solar 
character of which is beyond question. But unlike everything that in the cycle 
of the Grail and in the imperial saga reflects the same spirit (besides having 
connections with the primordial tradition), it lacks a committed character. 
What I mean is that we should not suppose any precise connection between the 
Hermetic initiates and militant organizations such as the Ghibelline knight- 
hood and Love's Lieges. Thus, what is missing is any attempt of direct inter- 
vention in the interplay of historical forces in order (a) to reestablish contact 
between a given political power and the invisible "center"; (b) to actualize 
through the Mystery that transcendent dignity which the Ghibelline move- 
ment claimed for a particular sovereign; and (c) to establish again the union of 
the "two powers." Therefore, the witness proper to the abovementioned tradi- 
tion was merely the special inner dignity which a number of individuals con- 
tinued to aspire to; these people in this way preserved an ancient legacy even 
after the decline of medieval civilization and of the Sacrum Imperium, beyond 
the humanistic collapse of the traditions of the Love's Lieges, beyond the devi- 
ations represented by naturalism, humanism, and secularism which character- 
ize later ages. Thus, "our Gold," the corpse that has to be resuscitated, the solar 
Lord of the two powers, appeared in Hermeticism essentially as symbols of the 
inner work which is as invisible as were the "center" and the "second paradise" 
which the "Heroes" of Delia Riviera intended to reach by fighting. 

Moreover, following the Renaissance and the Reformation, the visible dom- 
inators appeared more and more as merely temporal leaders lacking any higher 
chrism, transcendent authority, or the ability to represent that which in the 
Ghibelline movement was called the "regal religion of Melchizedek." Not only 
did monarchies decay and the "spiritual knighthood" cease to exist, but knight- 
hood itself began to decline, since the knights turned into soldiers and officers 
fighting as mercenaries for various nations and for their political ambitions. 
During this period the best way to pass on the tradition seemed to be the "her- 



156 



The Grail and the Hermetic Tradition 



metic" form in the ordinary sense of the term that alludes to everything that is 
impenetrable and sibylline. This form essentially employed the metallurgical 
and chemical jargon, as well as its extravagant and disheartening combinations 
of symbols, signs, operations, and mythological references. 6 This "covering" 
worked perfectly, and since Hermeticism was inspired mostly by autonomous, 
pre-Christian traditions it did not clash with orthodox Catholicism, even 
though it had less in common with it than with Dante's or the Love's Lieges' es~ 
otericism. In the later forms of a prevalently Rosicrucian Hermeticism things 
went otherwise. What occurred then was a sort of temporary reemergence of 
the secret tradition in history, though this reappearance eventually marked its 
final disappearance. 



6. In The Hermetic Tradition I have suggested that alchemy understood as the art of transforming 
metals into gold and of producing the elixir through physical procedures, was only the result of 
the misunderstanding of some outsiders who interpreted in a material sense the metallurgical 
symbolism of the Royal Art. It was only to these outsiders that we should attribute that type of 
alchemy which historians of science regard as a superstitious chemistry at the infantile state. 
However, this does not mean that some individuals, on the basis of the powers inherent in the 
Hermetic realization, have not applied themselves to produce a certain kind of abnormal physical 
phenomena, even in the field of experiments with real metals; this was indeed possible, though it 
had nothing to do with the misunderstandings of those misled alchemists, nor with any realiza- 
tion of modern science. 



157 



28 

The Grail and 
the Rosicrucians 



It is difficult to separate Rosicrucianism from Hermeticism; while Hermeticism 
in its essential features may be studied independently from Rosicrucianism, the 
opposite is not true, because what we know about Rosicrucianism appears to be 
heavily influenced by Hermetic symbols and elements. 

Historically speaking, Rosicrucianism should be regarded as one of the se- 
cret currents that emerged following the destruction of the Templar Order; 
some of these currents existed in embryopic form before this tragic event but 
became defined and organized especially after it, as an underground continua- 
tion of the same tendency. This marks a strong difference from Hermeticism, 
which, as I have said, seems to have existed in unchanged forms before and 
after the events surrounding the medieval attempt to bring about a traditional 
reconstruction. A second peculiar character is that Rosicrucianism incorpo- 
rated many Christian elements, even though as a starting point in the direction 
of an esoteric interpretation, as well as elements from the literature of the 
Love's Lieges and of the romance and troubadour traditions, where the rose 
had become a symbol of particular importance. The terms that designate the 
movement, "Rose" and "Cross" already hint at this connection. Thus this 
movement presents a character that is less original than the Grail's, with its 
Nordic pre-Christian nucleus, and than Hermeticism's, with its pagan and 
Mediterranean nucleus. 

From a spiritual point of view, "Rosicrucian" (just like "Buddha," "Prester 
John" or "Knight of the Two Swords") is essentially a title that characterizes a 



158 



The Grail and the Rosicrucians 



specific degree of inner realization. The term should be explained on the basis 
of a universal symbolism, rather than on the basis of Christian symbolism. The 
cross, in this symbolism, represents the encounter of the direction from above, 
expressed by the vertical line, with the earthly level, expressed by a horizontal 
line. This encounter in most people occurs in the sense of a suspension, neu- 
tralization, or fall (the "crucifixion of transcendent man in matter" as the an- 
cient Gnostics and Manicheans used to say). In the initiate, instead, this 
encounter results in a full possession of the human condition, which is thereby 
transformed; therefore such a development, conceived as an opening up, as an 
expanding and as a blossoming, is indicated by the rose, which in the 
Rosicrucian symbol blossoms at the center of the cross, that is, at the intersect- 
ing point of the vertical and horizontal lines. 1 The people united through the 
identity of such a realization must be regarded as true Rosicrucians. The orga- 
nization to which they belonged must be regarded as a derivative and contin- 
gent thing. 

It seems that the Rosicrucians' activity began in the second half of the four- 
teenth century and that the birth of the founder or legendary reorganizer of 
the order, Christian Rosenkreuz, in 1378, was only a symbol of the first period 
of organization. Various traits of Rosenkreuz's life also appear to have an 
equally symbolic character; he allegedly spent twelve years in a monastery; 
later on, he traveled to the East, where he was initiated to true wisdom. We 
have already seen that Frederick II had claimed a mysterious Eastern origin for 
his "Rose " This could be the reintegration of the Christian ascetic teaching 
(e.g., Rosenkreuz in the monastery) through a higher kind of knowledge, of 
which some secret Eastern organizations of Arabic-Persian origins were the 
depositories. Once Christian Rosenkreuz returned to the West, he was ex- 
pelled from ultra-Catholic Spain for carrying the scent of heresy and finally 
settled down in Germany, his original homeland. His native town, 
Rosenkreuz, is in Germany, "and yet it is not found on any map." He imparted 
his knowledge only to a very restricted group of people. Having withdrawn to 
a cave, which became his tomb, he wanted his tomb to be left alone until the 
right time came, namely, 120 years after his death. Since Rosenkreuz allegedly 
died in 1484, the discovery of the cave and of his tomb occurred in 1604; this 
is more or less the time in which the Rosicrucian movement begins to be 
known and emerges in history, as if it literally sprang from beneath the 



1. See my Hermetic Tradition, chapter 10. Since the vertical line symbolizes the masculine and the 
horizontal line the feminine, the overall symbol of the cross as an active integration of the two 
principles has a meaning not very far from that of the so-called magical wedding and of the 
androgyne. 



159 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



ground. 2 The intermediate period, in this symbolic tale, may allude to a pe- 
riod of underground reorganization; the period between 1604 and 1648, the 
date around which, according to tradition, the Rosicrucians permanently left 
Europe, could be seen as that of an attempt to exercise a given influence on 
the historical climate of the West by arousing the feeling of certain "pres- 
ences" and by evoking again the symbol of the invisible kingdom. The num- 
ber of writings about the Rosicrucians published in this period is aston- 
ishing; owing to some kind of collective suggestion, even though not much 
was known about them, the Rosicrucians became a myth and produced a var- 
ied literature, pro and contra, until the interest vanished with the same ra- 
pidity with which it first arose, more or less as it had happened with the Grail 
literature. 

The most important documents, besides the Allgemeine Reformation, with 
its complement Confessio fraternitatis Rosae Crucis, ad eruditos Europae (Cassel, 
1615), are the so-called Manifestos of the Rosicrucians, which were published 
in Frankfurt and in Paris in the period between 1613 and 1623. The most im- 
portant points we may gather from these writings, once the spurious and most 
external parts are removed, are more or less the following: 

1. There is a "confraternity" of beings who "dwell in a both invisible and vis- 
ible manner" in the cities of men, "God has covered them with a cloud to pro- 
tect them from their evil enemies." The former were called alumbrados and the 
Invisible Ones in Spain and France. This must refer to the transcendent nature 
of these enigmatic personalities, properly called Rosicrucians. Anyone ani- 
mated by mere curiosity cannot communicate with them; but a contact is es- 
tablished automatically and one is ttvly enrolled in the "roster of our 
confraternity" through the "intention and the real will of the reader" According 
to the Rosicrucians Manifestos, this is the only way "to make our acquain- 
tance." It is thanks to revelation (as in the Grail's order) that the Rosicrucians 
know those who are worthy to become members of their order and who, being 
part of it, can be Rosicrucians without knowing it. 

2. "Rosicrucian," as I have said, represents essentially an initiatory level and 
a function, not a person as such. Thus it is said that the Rosicrucian is not 
subject to the contingencies of nature and to its needs, to illnesses and old age: 
he lives in every age as he lived from the beginning of the world. The order 



2, The legend of Christian Rosenkreutz is contained in an anonymous writing first published in 
1614 and then again one year later, entitled Allgemeine und generate Reformation der gantzen weiten 
Welt, especially in the part known by the name "Fama fraternitatis, oder Bruderschaft des 
hochloblichen Ordens des R + C." 



160 



The Grail and the Rosicrucians 



predated its founders or organizers, namely, Rosenkreutz and, some say, King 
Solomon. Practically speaking, when the Rosicrucian is ready to die, that is, to 
leave the human condition, he chooses a person capable of succeeding him and 
of assuming his function, which therefore continues unchanged. This person 
assumes the name of his predecessor. The order is led by a mysterious impera- 
tor, whose real identity and seat remain unknown. A writing published in 1 6 1 8, 
Clipeum veritatis, presents the sequence of the Rosicrucians imperatores: 
among them were the names of Seth (whose symbolic role in the Grail cycle is 
well known), Enoch, and Elijah, prophets "who never died," sometimes even 
presented as mysterious initiators. 

3. The Rosicrucians are supposed to adopt the clothes of the countries to 
which they travel or where they take residence: in other words, they must 
choose an external way of appearance proper to the place and the environment 
in which they are supposed to act Without books or signs they can speak and 
teach the language of all the lands where they choose to be present in order to 
free human beings from error and death. Allegorically speaking, I am referring 
to the so-called gift of languages, the ability to translate and speak in the terms 
of each of the individual traditions of the one primordial tradition. The knowl- 
edge possessed by the Rosicrucians is not considered new: it is the knowledge 
of the origins, "the light that Adam received before the Fall." Thus this knowl- 
edge cannot be compared and contrasted to any human opinion (Confessio fra- 
ternitatis). The Rosicrucians continuously help the world, but in invisible and 
unfathomable ways. 

4. The restoration of the king, which is a main motif of the Grail cycle and 
of Hermeticism, is also the main theme of the Chymische Hochzeit Christiani 
Rosencreutz: Anno 1459 (Strasburg, 1616), where various adventures, taking 
place over a period of seven days, allegorize the seven degrees or stages of ini- 
tiation. In the last day the elect are consecrated "Knights of the Golden 
Stone" (eques aurei lapidis). In this book we find the description of a journey 
to the king's residence. This is followed by the mystery of the resurrection of 
the king, a mystery that is significantly transformed in the realization that the 
king is already alive and awake: "Many find it strange that he is already risen, 
being under the impression that it was their task to awaken him." This is an 
allusion to the idea that the principle of regality in its metaphysical essence 
has always existed and should not be confused with a mere human creation, 
nor with the action of those who can precipitate a new manifestation of it in 
history. Besides the risen king, Rosenkreutz, who in him shall recognize "his 
father," wears the same insignia of the Templars and of Percivafs ship: a white 
flag with a red cross. Here we also find the Grail's bird, the dove. The knights 



161 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



of the Golden Stone swear allegiance to the risen or newly manifested king. 3 
The formula, found in another text, with which the participation in the 
Rosier ucian mystery is requested, corresponds in an exact way to the Templars' 
saying: "Not to ours, but to your name only, O God, Supreme One, we give 
glory forever and ever." 4 

5. The images of the seat of the Rosicrucians and of their emperor correspond 
to those of the center: this seat is the "solar citadel " the "mountain in the middle 
of the earth " simultaneously "close and far away" the "Palace of the Spirit at the 
further end of the earth, on top of a mountain, surrounded by clouds" almost a 
facsimile of Montsalvatsche. Here I will provide some references contained in 
Rosicrucians texts: the correspondence between the two traditions is sufficiently 
visible, just as the search for that mysterious center is connected (as in the Grail's 
legend) to initiatory tests and experiences having heroic traits. 

According to the Lettre de E G. Menapius 15 Juillet 1617, the Rosicrucians 
live in a castle built on a rock, encompassed by the clouds above and by the wa- 
ters below; in the middle of it are a golden scepter and a spring from which the 
Water of Life flows. In order to reach this casde it is necessary to first go 
through a tower, dubbed the "uncertain tower" and then through a second one, 
named the "dangerous tower"; finally one must climb the rock and touch the 
scepter. Then a Virgin will appear and lead the knight. The clouds disappear, 
the castle becomes visible, and the elect can now share in the "heavenly and 
earthly lordship." 

We can also refer to a text called Grundlicher Bericht von dem Vorhaben, 
Gelegenheit und Irihalt der lobl. Bruderschaft des R + C (Frankfurt, 1617), in 
which we read: ' 

In the middle of the world there is a mountain, both close and far away 
endowed with the greatest treasures guarded by the devil's malice. The 
path leading to it can be found only through one's effort. Pray and inquire 



3. Here we may detect a variation on the Grail's theme, in the form of a person "who sinned by see- 
ing Venus without veils" and who, because of it, has been sentenced to guard a door until the ar- 
rival of another man guilty of the same sin, who in turn will assume that function. This is what 
happened to Rosenkreutz, who wanted to free the guardian and who will himself not be freed 
"until the wedding feast of the next king's son." 

4. The secret stone plays an important role in the Rosicrucian text by Sincerus Renatus, Die 
wahrafte und volkommene Bereitung des philosophischen Steins der Bruderschaft aus dem Orden des 
Golden und Rosenkreuzes (Breslau, 1710). In this text we also find the list of the order's rules; the 
order is characterized both by the stone, (like the Grail's knights in Wolfram) and by the rose (the 
Love's Lieges). Every member of this order uses the stone, which he still must not show anyone; the 
stone has the power of renewing the knight, and this transformation occurs every time a 
Rosicrucian travels to another country. 



162 



The Grail and the Rosicrucians 



about the way, follow the guide, who is not an earthly being and who lives 
among you, though you do not know her. She will lead you to your desti- 
nation at midnight [i.e., the "Midnight Sun" of the classical Mysteries]. 

You will have to show the courage of a lion Just about the time you are 

ready to see the castle, a raging wind will shake the rocks. Tigers and drag- 
ons will assail you. An earthquake will knock down everything the wind 
has spared, and a mighty fire will destroy all earthly matter [see the tests 
taking place in Orgeluse's castle]. At dawn calm will return and you will 
see the treasure. 

This treasure, like the Hermeticists' Stone, has the power of transforming 
matter into "gold" that is, of reawakening in man the original "solar" con- 
dition. It restores health: "No one must know that you have it." After discover- 
ing the treasure, "you must turn around and you will find someone who will 
introduce you to the Confraternity and who will be your guide in every cir- 
cumstance." 

6. The Rosicrucians did not hesitate to condemn the "Middle Eastern and 
Western blasphemers" this expression visibly alluding to Muslims and 
Catholics respectively. They added that they wanted to "pulverize the triple di- 
adem of the pope" claiming for themselves a higher "orthodoxy" and spiritual 
authority. The reference to the triple papal diadem has a special meaning, since 
this diadem is among the symbols that properly refer to the Universal Ruler 
and to his function, 5 which according to the Rosicrucians was usurped by the 
head of the Catholic Church, and whose real representative was their impera- 
tor. These enigmatic personalities declared that Europe was pregnant and des- 
tined to give birth to a powerful child: they also spoke of a "Roman" imperator, 
"Lord of the Fourth Empire" whom they vowed to supply with inexhaustible 
treasures. The fundamental idea of the Allgemeine Reformation der gantzen 
weiten Welt and Fama fraternitatis is that the Rosicrucians' mission is to bring 
out a general restoration in the name of their mysterious imperator, before the 
end of the world. 

After the last two Rosicrucian manifestos appeared in Paris, and after the 
Thirty Years War ended with the Treaty of Wesphalia, which imparted the final 
blow to what was left of the authority of the Holy Roman Empire, the last true 
Rosicrucians allegedly left Europe to go to an "India " which should probably 
be understood as that symbolic country, assimilated to Prester John's kingdom, 
to which Montsalvatsche, the Grail, and its knights had previously gone. The 
"end of the world" that the Rosicrucians talked about probably alluded only to 



5. R, Guenon, Le Roi du monde, chapter 4. 



163 



THE LEGACY OF THE GRAIL 



the end of one of the many worlds, namely, to a cycle of civilizations, like the 
vision of the hordes of Gog and Magog, which in the imperial saga was the pre- 
figuration of that "daimony of the masses" that in modern times, following the 
French Revolution and the downfall of the major European dynastic traditions, 
was bound to assume increasingly apocalyptic overtones. 

Concerning the mission of the real Rosicrucians during the eighteenth cen- 
tury, it must have been limited to producing a certain rumor and restlessness 
in the environment, not without a specific "experimental" intention, by "in- 
spiring" various authors, yet without a true militant intention. Everything 
seems to suggest that the Rosicrucians never constituted a material organi- 
zation involved in the political arena, thus susceptible of being individuated 
and dealt with, and that they remained invisible, beyond the myth that grew 
about them (one of the designations of their group was "The Congress of the 
Invisible People .") It seems that the Rosicrucians 5 experiment elicited a nega- 
tive response, which eventually induced them "to leave" We cannot exclude 
that one of the factors that contributed to this decision was the deformation 
that certain ideas, owing to the environment, were immediately destined to un- 
dergo, thus producing opposite effects from the ones desired. In the mixture 
represented by the works of Johann Valentin Andreae, and of other authors in- 
spired by the Rosy Cross, we can clearly see a marked tendency to employ, in a 
manner typical of Protestantism and the Enlightenment, the Rosicrucian aver- 
sion for the Catholic Church, thus generating one of the worst misunder- 
standings and one of the most dangerous deviations: I am referring to that 
misunderstanding that led the Teutonic princes to betray the sacred idea of the 
Empire at the very time they followed th£ Lutheran emancipation from Rome. 
This was an involution that, instead of overcoming the imperfect, lunar spiri- 
tuality represented by the Church with a higher form, closer in spirit to the 
transcendent regality of the Grail, people failed to unmask and reject. And so 
it happened that people became emancipated from this involution only by sid- 
ing with the rationalism of the Enlightenment, with liberalism and with secu- 
lar culture; this indeed almost represents a quasi-demonic overturning of 
Ghibellinism. 

In the modern age it is possible to find several instances of an inverted use 
of the Mystery. The Mystery, which in its proper context and in previous times 
had always been an aristocratic privilege as well as the basis for an absolute and 
legitimate authority "from above" has been transformed in a weapon of 
heretics, of those degenerated forces that rise up from below against the last hi- 
erarchies, against the authority of the Church and finally against the authority 
of the representatives of traditional political organizations. I will discuss this in 
greater detail in the epilogue. 



164 



The Grail and the Rosicrucians 



In more recent times Hermeticism and Rosicrucianism have inspired vari- 
ous sects and authors who have illegitimately claimed to be the representatives 
of these traditions, but who militate in the ranks of Theosophy of occultism, of 
Anthroposophy, and in analogous by-products of the contemporary pseudo- 
spiritual deviation. Thus the majority of people, who ignore even the princi- 
ples behind these matters, are led to think of these sects as soon as they hear 
mention of Hermeticism and Rosicrucianism. The truth is quite the opposite, 
however: these sects have nothing to do with the traditions the names and the 
symbols of which they have usurped. Moreover, the authentic representatives 
of these traditional organizations have not resided in the Western world for 
quite some time. The relationship between these organizations, on the one 
hand, and the Theosophical Society, Anthroposophy, and the like, on the other 
hand, is the same as that between Wagner's mystical-Christian and romantic- 
musical portrayal of the Grail in Parzifal and the authentic tradition of the 
Lords of the Temple. 



165 



EPILOGUE 



The Inversion of 
Ghibellinism 



Since my investigation has also uncovered the connections between initiatory 
organizations and historical currents, I think it is necessary, in conclusion, to 
say something about the existing relationship between what I have called the 
legacy of the Grail, namely, high Ghibellinism, and the modern secret societies, 
particularly those that since the Enlightenment have been labeled as Masonic. 
Obviously, the following is only a brief overview. 

In the so-called sect of Bavaria's Illurninati we find a typical example of the 
overturning of tendencies that I have previously described. This can be seen in 
the change of meaning undergone by the term Enlightenment. Originally the 
term referred to a suprarational, spiritual illumination; slowly but inexorably, 
it became synonymous with rationalism, with the theory of "natural light," and 
with antitradition. We may speak, in regard to it, of a counterfeited and sub- 
versive use of the right belonging to the initiate alone. The initiate, if truly such, 
may regard himself to be above the contingent historical forms of a particular 
tradition; denounce its limitations (if he received the mandate to do so) and 
place himself above their authority; reject dogmas, because he possesses some- 
thing higher, namely, a transcendent knowledge that he regards as the ultimate 
authority; and finally, claim for himself the dignity of a free being, because he 
has freed himself from the bonds of the merely human, inferior nature. To this 
effect the "free ones" constitute a community of equals, which may be regarded 
as a true confraternity. 

Therefore, if we materialize* secularize, and democratize these aspects of the 



166 



Epilogue 



initiatory right and translate them into individualistic terms, what we have are 
the fundamental principles of the modern subversive and revolutionary ide- 
ologies. The light of mere human reason replaces the illumination, giving rise 
to the havoc brought about by "free inquiry" and secular criticism. The super- 
natural is banned or confused with nature. Freedom and equality are illegiti- 
mately claimed by the individual who is "conscious of his dignity" (though he 
is not conscious of being enslaved to his empirical self) and who now arises 
against any form of established authority, vainly setting himself up as his own 
ultimate reason for being. I say "vainly" because in the inexorable unfolding of 
the various phases of modern decadence, individualism has been only a short- 
lived mirage and a misleading intoxication; the collective and irrational ele- 
ment in the age of the masses and of technology has rapidly overcome the 
emancipated "individual" who is without roots and without traditions. 

Beginning in the eighteenth century, new groups arise, alongside the so- 
called societes depensee, flaunting an initiatory character while at the same time 
engaging in a revolutionary and "reform-minded" activity of "enlightenment" 
and rationalism. 1 Some of these groups were truly the continuation of previ- 
ous organizations of a regular and traditional type. Thus, in their case, we must 
think of a process of involution reaching a point at which, owing to the with- 
drawal of the principle that originally animated these organizations, a real in- 
version of polarity occurred. Influences of another order and kind infiltrated 
and began to act in organisms that represented more or less the cadaver or the 
automatic survival of what they once used to be, utilizing and turning their en- 
ergies toward the opposite direction of what had previously been their normal 
and traditional one. 2 The prologue of A. Dumas's Joseph Balsam is a symptom 
of the climate proper to the lodges and meetings of the Illuminati and of sim- 
ilar groups responsible for promoting that "intellectual revolution" that even- 
tually unleashed the political revolutions of 1789 and 1848. In this prologue, 
which is something more than mere fancy because it uses data produced at the 
trial of this character, we learn about a leader who introduces himself as a 
Rosicrucian Great Master; this leader, at a secret meeting of initiates who have 
gathered from every nation, gives out as the general password "L.P.D." (the ini- 
tials of lilia destrue pedibus, i.e., "destroy and step over the House of France"). 3 

The contradictory duplicity of the two motifs — on the hand, residues of 



1. It was owing to sheer chance that positive proofs were adduced, documenting also a revolution- 
ary activity promoted by the sect of the Illuminati; documents were found on the body of a courier 
killed by lightning. 

2. On the mechanism of this process, in its analogy with a necromantic action, see R. Guenon's Le 
Regne de la quantite et les signes des temps (Paris, 1945), chapters 26-27. 

3. The initials L.P.D. appear in the first of the so-called knightly degrees of Freemasonry (the 



167 



THE MYSTERY OF THE GRAIL 



symbolic and initiatory hierarchical ritualism; on the other hand, the profes- 
sion of ideologies totally opposed to those that may deduced from any au- 
thentic initiatory doctrine — is apparent especially in modern Freemasonry. It 
seems that this Freemasonry was organized at the time of the Rosicrucian de- 
velopments and of the departure of true Rosicrucians from Europe. Elias 
Ashmole, who is believed to have played a fundamental role in the organiza- 
tion of early English Freemasonry, lived between 1617 and 1692, Moreover, 
according to the prevalent opinion, Freemasonry in its actual form as a semi- 
secret, militant association, does not predate 1700. 4 It was precisely in 1717 
that the Great Lodge of London was founded. The positive rather than fanci- 
ful antecedents of Freemasonry were the traditions of some medieval guilds, 
in which the main elements of the art of construction and building were si- 
multaneously considered in their allegorical and initiatory meaning. Thus the 
"construction of the Temple* became synonymous with the initiatory Great 
Work, the molding of the coarse stone into a square block alluded to the pre- 
liminary task of inner formation, and so forth. We may assume that up to the 
beginning of the eighteenth century, Freemasonry retained this initiatory and 
traditional character, thus being named "operative," in reference to the task of 
an inner action. 5 It was in 1717 that an inversion of polarity and a radical up- 
heaval occurred, with the foundation of London's Great Lodge and with the 
diffusion of the so-called continental speculative Freemasonry. The "specula- 
tion" adopted was that proper to the ideology of the Enlightenment, the 
Encyclopedic, and Rationalism, which was connected with a corresponding, 
misguided interpretation of symbols. The activity of the organization focused 
entirely on the sociopolitical plane, though it prevalently employed the tactics 



fifteenth in the overall hierarchy of the Scottish rite). Allegedly, the legend of this degree alludes 
obscurely to the shift of the function of the initiate; mention is made of marks of princely digni- 
ties that the person to be initiated is supposed to receive, together with freedom, from "Cyrus," 
though he eventually loses them; once he reaches the master who took refuge among the ruins of 
Solomon's Temple with a small group of surviving followers, he is told about the dubious value of 
those titles and receives a new title and sword. 

4. See A. Pike, Morals and Dogmas of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite (Richmond, 1927). 

5. However, we must note that in Freemasonry 's operative and initiatory period it is already possi- 
ble to detect a certain usurpation, in that this organization attributes to itself the Royal Art. The 
initiation connected to the arts is that which corresponds to the ancient Third Estate (the Hindu 
caste of the vaisya)> that is, to social strata that are hierarchically inferior to the caste of the war- 
riors, to whom the Royal Art legitimately belongs. Moreover, we must also note that the revolu- 
tionary action of modern, speculative Freemasonry is that which undermined the civilizations of 
the Second Estate and prepared, through democracies, the advent of the Third Estate. Concerning 
the first point, even on the most external level one cannot help laughing at the sight of pictures of 
English kings who, as Masonic dignitaries, wear the apron and other signs of artisan corporations. 



168 



Epilogue 



of indirect action, maneuvering with influences and suggestions the origins of 
which is difficult to trace. 

It is claimed that this transformation occurred only in some lodges and that 
others retained their initiatory and operative character even after 1717. True 
enough, this character can be found in the Masonic milieus to which Martinez 
de Pasqually, Claude de Saint-Martin, and Joseph de Maistre belonged. We 
must also think, however, that this same kind of Freemasonry must have un- 
dergone a phase of degeneration if it could not stem the growth of the other 
kind and avoid being overcome by it. Nor can we see any action on the part of 
that Freemasonry that allegedly had retained the initiatory dimension to dis- 
avow the other, condemning its sociopolitical activity and trying to prevent it 
from asserting itself as the authentic and official Freemasonry 

"Speculative" Freemasonry 's initiatory vestiges remained confined to a rit- 
ual superstructure, which had an inorganic and syncretistic character, espe- 
cially in the Scottish Rite. In fact, for many of its degrees following the first 
three (the only ones that have some effective connection with the previous 
guild traditions), symbols of the most various initiatory traditions were gath- 
ered, obviously with the intention of giving the impression of having inherited 
their legacy. Thus in this Freemasonry we also find elements of chivalry, 
Hermeticism, and Rosicrucianism. In it we find "dignities" such as that of 
"Knight of the West" or "of the Sword"; "Knight of the Sun"; "Knight of the 
Two Eagles"; "Initiate Prince"; "Dignitary of the Sacred Empire"; and "Knight 
Kadosh" (in Hebrew "Holy Knight"), which corresponds to "Knight Templar" 
and "Rosicrucian Prince " 

Generally speaking — and this is what is particularly significant to my 
book — there is a particular ambition, on the part of the Freemasonry of the 
Scottish Rite, to evoke the Templar tradition. Thus the claim was made that at 
least seven of its degrees after the thirtieth, which in several lodges explicitly 
carries the designation of "Templar Knight" have a Templar origin. One of the 
jewels of the highest degree in the entire hierarchy (the thirty-third) is a 
Teutonic cross that carries the initials J.B.M. These initials are usually explained 
to stand for Jacopus Burgundus Molay, who was the last Great Master of the 
Order of the Temple; "de Molay" also appears as the password of this degree, 
almost to suggest that those who are initiated in it could reclaim the dignity 
and the function of the leader of the destroyed Ghibelline Order. After all, 
Scottish Freemasonry claims to have received many of its elements from an 
even older organization called The Rite of Heredom. This expression is trans- 
lated by various Masonic authors as "rite of the heirs " meaning the heirs of the 
Knights Templar. The corresponding legend is that a few surviving Templars 
withdrew to Scotland, where they put themselves under the protection of 



169 



THE MYSTERY OF THE GRAIL 



6. The Ritual of the XXXth Degree of the Supreme Belgian Counsel of the Ancient and Accepted 
Scottish Rite (Brussels), 49-50. In a dramatic ritual action, Squin de Florian, the alleged accuser 
of the Templars, is made to say as his justification: "The Church is above freedom!" This is coun- 
tered by the Master of the Great Lodge, who says: "Freedom is above the Church!" Obviously, the 
first statement is correct if we are dealing with the claim to freedom on the part of any individual; 
the second statement is true if we are dealing with a person who has the required qualification to 
put himself beyond the inevitable limitations proper of a particular historical form of spiritual 
authority. 



170 






Robert the Bruce; from him they were aggregated to a preexisting initiatory or- 
ganization of guild origins, which then assumed the name Great Royal Lodge 
of Heredom. 

One can easily see the consequence of these references in regard to what I 
have called the "legacy of the Grail" if they had a real foundation: they would 
supply Freemasonry with the character of traditional orthodoxy. Things are ] 

otherwise, however. This is a real usurpation: what we have here is not a con- 
tinuation but rather an inversion of the previous tradition. This can be clearly 
seen when we consider the abovementioned thirtieth degree of the Scottish 
rite, which in some Masonic lodges has the password "The Templars' Revenge " 
The "legend" referred to it develops the abovementioned motif: the Templars 
allegedly found refuge in some secret English organizations and established in 
them this degree with the intention of reorganizing their order and perpetrat- 
ing their revenge. The inversion of Ghibellinism I talked about could not be 
formulated more clearly than in this elucidation from their manual: "The 
Templar revenge reached Clement V, not on the day when his bones were 
burned on a pyre by Provence's Calvinists, but when Luther aroused half of 
Europe against the papacy in the name of the rights of one's conscience. The 
revenge also reached Philip the Fair, not on the day when his remains were 
thrown into the garbage by a rioting mob and not even when the last descen- 
dant of absolute power left the Temple, which had become the state's prison, 
to mount the scaffold, but rather when the French Constitutional Assembly 
proclaimed to the surviving monarchies the 'rights of the individual and of the 
citizen.'" 6 

That the level eventually descended ffom the plane of the individual (i.e., 
"Man" and "Citizen") to that of the anonymous masses and of their represen- 
tatives can be established by a story related to the ritual of various degrees; in 
the Scottish Rite of the Supreme Counsel of Germany it was in the fourth de- 
gree, that of "The Secret Master" It is the story of Hiram, the builder of 
Jerusalem's Temple, who before the sacred king Solomon proved to have such 
prodigious power over the masses that "the king, who was renowned as one of 
the world's wisest men, discovered that beyond his own, there is a much greater 



Epilogue 



power, a power that in the future will assert itself and exercise a sovereignty 
greater than Solomon's: this power is the people (das Volk)." It is also stated: 
"We, Freemasons of the Scottish Rite, see in Hiram a personification of 
mankind." The rite, in making them "Secret Masters " should convey to the 
Masonic initiates the nature of Hiram: in other words, it should make them 
partakers of this mysterious power to lead mankind in the form of people, and 
masses, a power that should eclipse that of the sacred symbolic king. 

Concerning the specifically Templar degree (the thirtieth) > we should also 
note, in its rite, the confirmation of the association between the initiatory ele- 
ment and the subversive, antitraditional element, which necessarily bestows on 
the former the character of an effective counterinitiation wherever the rite is 
not reduced to an empty ceremony but instead activates subtle forces. In this 
degree, the initiate who knocks down the Temple's columns and steps over the 
cross, being admitted, after this, to the Mystery of the ascending and descend- 
ing stairs with seven steps, must swear revenge and ritually actualize this oath 
by striking with a dagger the Crown and the Tiara, which are the symbols of 
the traditional double power, namely, of the regal and pontifical authority. All 
this properly conveys the meaning of what Freemasonry, as an occult force of 
global subversion, has precipitated in the modern world, from the preparation 
for the French Revolution and the establishment of the American democracy 
to the revolutions of 1848, World War I, the Turkish revolution, the Spanish 
revolution, and other analogous events. While in the cycle of the Grail the ini- 
tiatory realization was conceived in such a way as to be connected with the goal 
of resurrecting the king, in the abovementioned ritual we have exactly the op- 
posite, namely, the counterfeit of an initiation that is tied to the oath (some- 
times expressed with the formula "Victory or Death!") of striking or over- 
turning any authority from above. 

In any event, the reason behind these considerations is to indicate the point 
where the "legacy of the Grail" and of analogous initiatory traditions stops and 
where, with the exception of the survival of a few surviving names and symbols, 
we can no longer detect any legitimate filiation from them. In the specific case 
of modern Freemasonry the following factors would make it appear as a typical 
example of a pseudoinitiatory organization: its confused syncretism; the artifi- 
ciality of most of its hierarchy's degrees (something that even a layman would 
notice); and the banality of the moralistic, social, rationalistic, and modern ex- 
egesis applied to various borrowed elements that have an authentic esoteric 
character, 7 And yet, considering the "efficient direction" of that organization in 



7. It is surprising to find in a very qualified expert in traditional studies, such as Gu£non, the claim 
that together with Compagnionaggio, Freemasonry is almost the only organization in the West 



171 



THE MYSTERY OF THE GRAIL 



reference to the previously mentioned elements and to its revolutionary activ- 
ity, one cannot help feeling that he is confronting a force that, on the spiritual 
plane, acts against the spirit itself: a dark force of antitradition and counterini- 
tiation. In that case it is possible that its rites are more harmful than one may 
think, and that those who partake of it, without realizing it, establish contact 
with this force, which cannot be grasped by ordinary consciousness. 

A final note. In the legend of the thirty-second degree of the Scottish rite 
("Sublime Prince of the Regal Secret"), mention is often made of the organiza- 
tion and of the inspection of forces (conceived as having been gathered from 
many "camps") that, after conquering "Jerusalem," will erect the "Third 
Temple " This Temple should be identified as the "Sacred Empire" or "Empire 
of the World" was mentioned often in the so-called Protocols of the Elders of 
Zion, which contain the myth of a detailed conspiracy against the traditional 
European world. I said "myth" on purpose, thus leaving open the issue of the 
authenticity or falsehood of this document, which is often exploited by a 
vulgar anti-Semitism. 8 The fact remains that this document, like many other 



that currently may claim, despite its degeneration, "an authentic traditional origin and a regular 
initiatory transmission'* (Apercus sur Vinitiation [Paris, 1946]> 40> 103.) Guenon apparently rejects 
the correct diagnosis of Freemasonry as a pseudoinitiatory syncretism promoted by underground 
forces of counterinitiation, a diagnosis that could be established even on the basis of his own views. 
How Guenon's view of Freemasonry as a traditional organization could possibly be reconciled with 
his positive assessment of Catholicism, a sworn enemy of modern Freemasonry, still needs to be 
clarified. Such a misunderstanding is also dangerous under another aspect, since it offers valuble 
weapons to Catholic apologetics. The mystification and the subversive use of the Mystery, which 
took place by inversion in the previously mentioned currents and especially in contemporary 
Freemasonry, has been comforting to a bizarre thesis of militant Catholicism, according to which 
the entire initiatory tradition, everywhere, in every time, has had a dark, diabolical, anti-Christian, 
and subversive aspect. This is obviously a preposterous interpretation. And yet isn't it possible that 
such a thesis is comforted by those who thoughtlessly attribute a character of orthodoxy and of 
regular initiatory filiation to Freemasonry? 

At this point I fear that my readers will think that I nurture some preconceived bias and hos- 
tility toward Freemasonry, Personally, I have had friendly relationships with high-level representa- 
tives of this organization, who have endeavored to emphasize its initiatory and traditional vestiges, 
I am thinking here of people such as A. Reghini, Ragon, and O. Wirth. I also know about lodges 
such as the Johannis Loge and others, which have refrained from engaging in sociopolitical activ- 
ity and have essentially acted as centers of study. But out of love for the truth I cannot possibly 
modify in any part my evaluation of modern Freemasonry because of the predominant direction 
of its actions. [For an exchange of views between Evola and Guenon on Freemasonry, see J. Evola's 
Rene Guenon: A Teacher for Modern Times (Edmonds, Wash.: Sure Fire Press, 1994) — Trans.] 
8, In the Protocols of the Elders of Zion the plot is allegedly orchestrated by the Jewish community, 
though mention is made of Freemasonry, Another point that must be emphasized is that the ele- 
ments that Freemasonry borrows from Western traditions are almost secondary to the Jewish ones, 
since the greater part of the legends and passwords have a Jewish origin. This too is rather 

172 



Epilogue 



similar ones, has a symptomatic value, since the main upheavals of contempo- 
rary history that have taken place after its publication have displayed an un- 
canny resemblance to the plan described in it. Generally speaking, writings 
such as these reflect the obscure sensation of the existence of a scheming "in- 
telligence" behind the most characteristic events of modern subversion. 
Therefore, regardless of their authenticity, of whether they are totally conjured 
up, they have caught some vibrations in the air that history itself has con- 
firmed. It is exactly in the Protocols that we see the reemergence of the idea of 
a universal future empire and of organizations that work underground for its 
advent, 9 though in a counterfeit that I do not hesitate to call "satanic ," because 
what is effectively happening is the destruction and the uprooting of all that is 
traditional, of the values of personality and true spirituality. The alleged em- 
pire is nothing but the supreme concretization of the religion of earthly man, 
who has become the ultimate reason unto himself and who views God as an 
enemy. It is the theme with which Spengler's Decline of the West and the ancient 
Hindu tradition of the Kali Yuga, or Dark Age, seem to end. 

In conclusion, it is opportune to mention the reason why this book was 
written. My goal is obviously not to add yet another contribution to the nu- 
merous critical-literary essays that have been written on the subject. In this area 
my book will be valuable insofar as it demonstrates the fecundity of the 
method that I have labeled "traditional," vis-a-vis that employed by current 
academic research. 

Another goal of mine was to establish the nature of the spiritual content of 
the subject matter. In this regard, the present book relates to other books I have 
written with the intent of denouncing the distortions that traditional symbols 
and doctrines have undergone because of modern authors and trends. In the 
course of my exposition I have pointed out, in reference to the cycle of the Grail, 



suspicious. In fact, in the whole Judaic tradition it is possible to detect a process of degeneration and 
inversion that has likewise aroused counterinitiatory forces or forces of antitraditional subversion. 
These forces have probably played a not negligible role in the secret history of Freemasonry. 
9. In passing, we must note that the revolutionary work of Freemasonry is essentially limited to the 
preparation and consolidation of the Age of the Third Estate (which has given rise to the world of 
capitalism, democracy, and bourgeois civilization and society). The last phase of world subversion, 
since it corresponds to the advent of the Fourth Estate, is also connected to other forces that nec- 
essarily go beyond Freemasonry and Judaism, even though they have often used the destruction 
promoted by both of these movements. It is significant that the actual avant-garde of the Age of 
the Fourth Estate have elected the symbol of the pentagram, the five-pointed star, as the red star of 
the Soviets. The ancient magical symbol of the power of man as initiate and master of the super- 
natural (a symbol that also consecrated the sword of the Grail) becomes, by inversion, the symbol 
of the omnipotence and the rule of materialized and collectivized man in the reign of the Fourth 
Estate. 

173 



THE MYSTERY OF THE GRAIL 



the falsification of its spirit and themes by Richard Wagner. Unfortunately, most 
people know about the Grail, Percival, and related things only because of the ar- 
bitrary, pseudomystical, and decadent way in which Wagner portrayed them on 
the basis of a fundamental misunderstanding: this misunderstanding was fur- 
ther compounded by the employment of several themes of ancient Nordic- 
Germanic mythology in his Ring of the Nibelungs. 

The same applies to the interpretations of some spiritualism that, often 
under the influence of Wagner, and lacking any serious and direct knowledge 
of the primary sources, has interpreted in a rather amateurish way the cycle of 
the Grail as some kind of "Christian esotericism" building upon it all kind of 
fancies, small groups and gatherings. On the contrary, I have shown that the 
main themes of the Grail are non-Christian and even pre-Christian and to 
what traditional order of ideas (i.e., those shaped by the regal and heroic spir- 
ituality) they are properly connected. In this cycle, the Christian elements are 
only secondary and serve as a cover-up. They derive from an attempt at adap- 
tation that has never succesfully unraveled what shows a substantial hetero- 
geneity of inspiration. As in other cases, this effort at fabricating a nonexistent 
"Christian esotericism" should be regarded as lacking any serious foundation. 

If the Grail is presented as an allegedly Christian mystery, it still lacks the 
special, essential relation with a task and an ideal that, as we have seen, go be- 
yond the mere initiatory plane and that presented themselves even in the West 
within a given historical cycle. 

Having said that, this study of mine has one further goal, which the reader 
may have already detected thanks to the last remarks I made concerning the in- 
version of Ghibellinism. Today we have reached such low levels that the word 
Ghibellinism has been employed, in the course of political controversies, to des- 
ignate the defense of the rights of a "secular" "modern " and non-confessional 
state against the interferences of the Catholic Church and of clerical-minded 
parties in the political, social, and cultural arenas, I hope the whole of my pre- 
sentation has established very clearly that this is one of the most deprecable in- 
stances of the loss of the original meaning of a term. In its essence, 
Ghibellinism has been nothing less than a form of the reapperance of the sa- 
cred and spiritual (in the currents that I have discussed, even initiatory) ideal 
of the authority befitting a leader of a traditional political organization. Thus 
it is exactly the opposite of everything that is "secular," and of everything that 
is political and governmental in the modern, degenerate sense of the word. 10 

One may wonder what is the point of shedding light on this essence of 
Ghibellinism, the Grails kingdom, and Templarism, other than to reestablish 



10. Concerning the Ghibelline movement in relation to the contemporary political situation, see 
my Gli uomini e le rovine (Rome, 3rd edition, 1971). 

174 



Epilogue 



the truth before the previously mentioned misunderstandings and counter- 
feits. The answer to this question must remain undetermined. Already in the 
mere arena of ideas, the character of the dominating culture is such that most 
people could not even imagine what the issue at stake is. After all, only a small 
minority could understand that just as the ascetic-monastic orders played a 
fundamental role during the material and moral chaos that brought about the 
collapse of the Roman Empire, likewise an order following in the footsteps of 
Templarism would have a decisive role in a world such as the modern one, 
which displays forms of greater dissolution and inner collapse than the previ- 
ous period. The Grail retains the meaning of a symbol in which the antithesis 
between "priest" and "warrior" is overcome, but also retains the modern equiv- 
alent of this antithesis, that is to say, materialized, telluric, and titanic, or better 
yet, Luciferian forms of the will to power on the one hand, and the lunar forms 
of the surviving devotional religion and of confused mystical and neospiritu- 
alist impulses toward the supernatural and what is not ordinary. 

If we just consider the individual and some people, the symbol always re- 
tains an intrinsic value, which is indicative for a given type of inner formation. 
But to go from this to the notion of an order, of a modern Templarism, and to 
believe that even if it were to come to be, it would be able to exercise an influ- 
ence directly and sensibly on the general historical forces that are dominant 
today — that is hasty. Even the Rosicrucians (the real Rosicrucians),back in the 
eighteenth century, regarded this attempt as vain. Moreover, even those who 
have received the "sword" must wait for the right time to wield it, the right mo- 
ment being only that in which forces, the power of which is still unknown 
owing to an intrinsic determinism, will encounter a real limit and the cycle will 
end. The right moment will be that in which, even before the most extreme ex- 
istential situations, a desperate defense instinct rising from the deepest recesses 
(I almost said, from the memoire de sangc) will eventually regalvanize and give 
strength to myths and ideas connected to the legacy of better times. I believe 
that before this happens, a possible Templarism may play only an inner defen- 
sive role, in relation to the task of protecting the symbolic, yet not merely sym- 
bolic, "solar stronghold." 

This will clarify the ultimate meaning of a serious and committed study of 
the witnesses and of the motifs of the Templar saga and of higher Ghibellinism. 
To understand and to live by these motifs means to enter into a dimension of 
suprahistorical realities and, in this way, to gradually reach the certainty that the 
invisible and inviolable center, the king who must awake, and the avenging and 
restorating hero are not mere fancies of a dead and romantic past, but rather the 
truth of those who, today, alone may legitimately be said to be alive. 

In the modern world there are two factors that, more than any others, are 
responsible for hindering our realization of the spirituality that was known 
in the most ancient traditions: the first is the abstract character of our cul- 
ture; the second is the glorification of a blind and frantic obsession with 
activity. 

On one hand, there are people who identify the "spirit" with the erudi- 
tion acquired in libraries and university classrooms, or with the intellec- 
tual games played by philosophers, or with literary or pseudomystical aes- 
theticism. On the other hand, the new generations have turned athletic 
competition into a religion and appear to be unable to conceive anything 
beyond the excitement of training sessions, competitions, and physical 
achievements; they have truly turned accomplishment in sports into an 
end in itself and even into an obsession rather than as means to a higher 
end. 

Some people regard this opposition of lifestyles as some kind of di- 
lemma. In reality, in the so-called scholarly type, we often find an innate 
strong dislike for any kind of physical discipline; likewise, in many sports- 
practicing people, the sense of physical strength fosters contempt for those 
in "ivory towers** who confine themselves to books and to battles of words 
they view as harmless. 

These two lifestyles should be regarded as misguided and as the fruits 
of modern decadence because they are both foreign to the heroic vision of 
the spirit that constituted the axis of the best Western classical traditions 
which, in the context of the actual renovation of Italy, is being successfully 
evoked. 



Doctri n E 



All too often people forget that spirituality is essentially a way of life 
and that its measure does not consist of notions, theories, and ideas that 
have been stored in one's head. Spirituality is actually what has been suc- 
cessfully actualized and translated into a sense of superiority which is 
experienced inside by the soul, and a noble demeanor, which is expressed 
in the body. 

From this perspective it is possible to appreciate a discipline which, 
although it may concern the energies of the body, will not begin and end 
with them but will become instead the means to awakening a living and 
organic spirituality. This is the discipline of a superior inner character 

In the ascetic, such a discipline is present in a negative way, so to speak; 
in the hero it is present in a positive, affirmative way, typical of the Western 
world. The inner victory against the deepest forces that surface in one's 
consciousness during times of tension and mortal danger is a triumph in an 
external sense, but it is also the sign of a victory of the spirit against itself 
and of an inner transfiguration. Hence, in antiquity an aura of sacredness 
surrounded both the hero and the initiate to a religious or esoteric move- 
ment, and heroic figures were regarded as symbols of immortality. 

However, in modern civilization everything tends to suffocate the 
heroic sense of life. Everything is more or less mechanized, spiritually 
impoverished, and reduced to a prudent and regulated association of 
beings who are needy and have lost their self-suffiency. The contact 
between man's deep and free powers and the powers of things and of 
nature has been cut off; metropolitan life petrifies everything, synco- 
pates every breath, and contaminates every spiritual "well." As if that 
weren't enough, faint-hearted ideologies foster contempt for those val- 
ues that in other times were the foundation of more rational and bright 
social organizations. In ancient societies the peak of the hierarchy was 
occupied by the caste of warrior aristocracy, whereas today, in the paci- 
fist-humanitarian Utopias (especially in the Anglo-Saxon ones), attempts 
are made to portray the warrior as some kind of anachronism, and as a 
dangerous and harmful entity that one day will be conveniently disposed 
of in the name of progress. 

Once it is suffocated, the heroic will seek further outlets outside the 
net of practical interests, passions, and yearnings, and that net becomes 



The Mountain and Spirituality 



tighter and tighter with the passing of time: the excitement that sports 
induce in our contemporaries is just an expression of this. But the heroic 
will need to be made self-aware again and to move beyond the limits of 
materialism. 

In the struggle against mountain heights, action is finally free from all 
machines, and from everything that detracts from man's direct and abso- 
lute relationship with things. Up close to the sky and to crevasses — among 
the still and silent greatness of the peaks; in the impetuous raging winds 
and snowstorms; among the dazzling brightness of glaciers; or among the 
fierce, hopeless verticality of rock faces — it is possible to reawaken (through 
what may at first appear to be the mere employment of the body) the 
symbol of overcoming, a truly spiritual and virile light, and make contact 
with primordial forces locked within the body's limbs. In this way the 
climber's struggle will be more than physical and the successful climb 
may come to represent the achievement of something that is no longer 
merely human. In ancient mythologies the mountain peaks were regarded 
as the seats of the gods; this is myth, but it is also the allegorical expres- 
sion of a real belief that may always come alive again sub specie 
interioritetis. 

In life — as has been pointed out, since Nietzsche, by Simmel — hu- 
mans have a strange and almost incredible power to reach certain existen- 
tial peaks at which "living more" (mehrleben), or the highest intensity of 
life, is transformed into "more than living" (mehralsleben). At these peaks, 
just as heat transforms into light, life becomes free of itself; not in the 
sense of the death of individuality or some kind of mystical shipwreck, but 
in the sense of a transcendent affirmation of life, in which anxiety, endless 
craving, yearning and worrying, the quest for religious faith, human sup- 
ports and goals, all give way to a dominating state of calm. There is some- 
thing greater than life, within life itself, and not outside of it. This heroic 
experience is valuable and good in itself, whereas ordinary life is only 
driven by interests, external things, and human conventions. I use the word 
experience, because this state is not connected with any particular creed 
or theory (which are always worthless and relative); rather it presents it- 
self in a most direct and undoubtable way, just like the experiences of 
pain and pleasure. 



Doctriiic 



This profound dimension of the spirit, which perceives itself as infi- 
nite, self-transcending, and beyond all manifest reality, is reawakened 
and shines forth — even though not entirely consciously — in the "insanity" 
of those who, in increasing numbers and without a specific reason, dare to 
challenge the mountain heights, led by a will that prevails over fears, ex- 
haustion, and the primitive instincts of prudence and self-preservation. 

Feeling left with only one's resources, without help in a hopeless situ- 
ation, clothed only in one's strength or weakness, with no one to rely upon 
other than one's self; to climb from rock to rock, from hold to hold, from 
ridge to ridge, inexorably, for hours and hours; with the feeling of the 
height and of imminent danger all around; and finally, after the harsh test 
of calling upon all one's self-discipline, the feeling of an indescribable 
liberation, of a solar solitude and of silence; the end of the struggle, the 
subjugation of fears, and the revelation of a limitless horizon, for miles 
and miles, while everything else lies down below — in all of this one can 
truly find the real possibility of purification, of awakening, of the rebirth of 
something transcendent. 

It does not matter that the heroic symbolism of the mountain can only 
be experienced initially by a few people. When these meanings are duly 
focused upon, they will influence people. There is no real climber who is 
not able to experience mountain climbing, if only in a few occasional 
flashes, as something more than a mere sport. Likewise, there is no real 
climber who does not display, in the eyes or in the face darkened by the 
sun's reflection on the snow, the mark of a race that has transformed be- 
yond that of the people of the plains. 

On this basis, we should save the mountains from the contaminating 
invasion of tourists who attempt to conquer them by building their "civi- 
lized" base camps. I am not just referring to those faint-hearted youths 
who bring with them to popular mountain resorts their vain, mundane city 
habits (such as discos and tennis courts), and who snobbishly display the 
colorful new equipment they've bought to use only for some harmless 
walk in the woods. I am also referring to those who tarnish silent and 
uncontaminated places with materialism and triviality, namely with a com- 
petitive spirit and a mania for that which is difficult and unusual, for the 
sake of setting new records. 



The Mountain and Spirituality 

The mountain requires purity and simplicity; it requires asceticism. 

O sky above me! O pure, deep sky! You abyss of light! Gaz- 
ing into you, I tremble with divine desires. To cast myself 
into your height — that is my depth! To hide myself in your 
purity — that is my innocence! And when I wandered alone 
what did my soul hunger after by night and on treacherous 
paths? And when I climbed mountains, whom did I always 
seek, if not you, upon mountains? And all my wandering and 
mountain climbing, it was merely a necessity and an expedi- 
ent of clumsiness: my whole will desires only to fly, to fly 
into you! [Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra (translated by 
Hollingdale, Penguin, 1961), 184] 

These are words that Friedrich Nietzsche, the philosopher who champi- 
oned the will to power, wrote in the secluded mountains of Engadine. To 
some people these words may amount to nothing more than lyrical effu- 
sions. To others they may contain both the intimate sense of the heroic 
spiritual attitude, the spirit of which is action, and the discipline of ruthless 
self-control. The temple of this spirit is the primordial majesty of the peaks, 
the glaciers, the crevasses, and the boundless blue sky. 

In this context the mountainous peaks and the spiritual peaks con- 
verge in one simple and yet powerful reality. 



I 



Some Remarks Concerning 
the Divinity of the Mountains 



In an editorial published in the Rivista del Club Alpino Italiano [Review 
of the Italian Mountain Association], S. Manaresi has underlined with 
efficacious words something that can never be overemphasized, namely, 
the necessity of overcoming the limiting antithesis between a scholarly, 
physically weak type — who is cut off from the deepest forces of the body 
and of life because of his self-imposed confinement to a culture made of 
words and books — and the sports-minded, healthy, athletic, and physi- 
cally strong type — who nevertheless lacks all metaphysical reference 
points. It is necessary today to go beyond the one-sidedness of either of 
these two types and to reach something more complete, namely, a human 
being in whom the spirit becomes power and life and in whom physical 
discipline in turn becomes the introduction to, the symbol and almost a rite 
of, a spiritual discipline. 

S. Manaresi has repeatedly claimed that among sports, mountain climb- 
ing is certainly the one that offers the most accessible opportunities for 
achieving this union of body and spirit. Truly, the enormity, the silence, 
and the majesty of the great mountains naturally incline the soul toward 
that which is greater than human, and thus attract the better people to the 
point at which the physical aspect of climbing (with all the courage, the 
self-mastery, and mental lucidity that it requires) and an inner spiritual 
realization, become the inseparable and complementary parts of one and 
the same thing. 

It may be interesting to remark that views such as these, which today 



D OCTR i n € 

are beginning to be emphasized by qualified individuals in order to pro- 
mote the right attitudes in the next generation, can at the same time be 
traced to a very ancient tradition, to something which may be called tradi- 
tional in the broadest sense of the word. Although the ancients did not 
practice mountain climbing, notwithstanding a few rudimentary excep- 
tions, they nonetheless had a very vivid sense of the sacredness and sym- 
bolism of the mountain. They also thought — and this is rather telling — 
that climbing mountains and living therein was a prerogative of heroes 
and initiates, in other words, beings who were believed to have gone be- 
yond the limits of the common and mediocre life of the plains. 

In the following pages I will offer a few comments on the traditional 
notion of the divinity of the mountain, looking beyond its symbols to its 
inner sense. Hopefully my observations will evoke some aspects of the 
spiritual side of mountain-climbing feats, the technical description of which 
only represents the outer dimension, or the caput mortuum. 



The notion of the divinity of the mountains is found equally in both East- 
ern and Western traditions, from the Chinese to the Aztecs of pre- 
Columbian America; from the Egyptians to the Aryan Nordic-Germanics; 
from Greeks to Iranians to Hindus. This notion is expressed in the form of 
myths and legends concerning either the mountain of the gods or of the 
heroes — which is allegedly the dwelling place of those who have been 
"taken up there" — or places inhabited by mysterious forces of glory and 
immortality. 

The general foundation for the symbolism of the mountain is simple: 
since the earth has been associated with everything human (the etymol- 
ogy of the word human is from humus, "soil"), the earth's peaks, which 
reach to the sky and which are transfigured by perennial snow, were spon- 
taneously regarded as the most apt material to express, through allego- 
ries, transcendental states of consciousness, inner spiritual realizations, 
and apparitions of extranormal modes of being, often portrayed figura- 
tively as gods and supernatural beings. Thus, we read not only of the moun- 
tains as symbolic "seats" of the gods, but we also encounter pertinent tra- 
ditions, such as those of the ancient Aryans living in Iran and in Media, in 
which people, according to Xenophon, never erected temples for their 



10 



Some Remarks Concerning the Divinity of the Mountains 

deities, but used mountain peaks to celebrate the cult of and the sacrifice 
to fire and the god of light. These cultures regarded mountains as wor- 
thier, more grandiose sites, analogically closer to the divine than any man- 
made temple or sacred building. 

According to the Hindus, the most divine mountain chain is the Hima- 
layan, a name that means in Sanskrit, "the seat of the snows." More spe- 
cifically, Mount Meru is the sacred mountain and is believed to be located 
in the Himalayas. It is important to note two things. First, Mount Meru is 
conceived to be the place in which Shiva, the great ascetic, performed his 
meditations. Second, it is from here that Shiva incinerated Kama, the Hindu 
god of love, when the latter tried to expose his heart to passion. In the 
Hindu tradition, the idea of absolute asceticism and stringent purification 
of nature is associated with the highest mountain peak. This idea is inac- 
cessible to anything coming from lust and desire and is therefore stable in 
a transcendent sense. Hence, in the ancient Vedic formulas for the conse- 
cration of kings, we find the image of the mountain symbolizing the stabil- 
ity of the power and of the imperium the king will assume. Moreover, in 
the Mahabarata we see Arjuna go to the Himalayas in order to practice 
asceticism because it is written that "only on the high mountains could he 
have achieved the divine vision." Likewise, the emperor Yudhisthira trav- 
eled to the Himalayas to achieve his apotheosis by climbing onto the 
"chariot" of the "king of the gods." 

It is also notable that the Sanskrit word paradesha means "elevated 
site," or "high region," and therefore, in a specific material sense, moun- 
tain peak. But paradesha may be etymologically associated with the 
Chaldean word pardes; hence the term paradise, which has been turned 
into a dogmatic theological concept by the later Judeo-Christian faith. In 
the primordial Aryan idea of paradise, we find an intimate association 
with the concept of heights, of mountain peaks; this association, as we 
shall see later on, is formulated in a clear manner in the Doric-Achaean 
notion of Olympus. 

At this point I must mention the Hellenic legends of those mythic 
characters who have been transported to a mountain. It is well known that 
the Hellenes, just like almost all the other Aryan tribes, had a markedly 
aristocratic view of the postmortem. The fate of most people, of those who 



11 



DOCTRIHE 

never elevated themselves over and above ordinary life, was thought to 
be Hades, namely, a larval and residual existence after death, devoid of 
true consciousness, spent in the underground world of shadows. Immortal- 
ity, besides the Olympian gods', was the privilege of the heroes, or, in 
other words, was the exceptional achievement of a few superior beings. In 
the oldest Hellenic traditions we find that the heroes' achievement of im- 
mortality was often portrayed through the symbolism of their ascending or 
disappearing into the mountains. Thus, we find again the mystery of the 
heights, since in this disappearing we must see the material symbol of a 
spiritual transfiguration. The expressions "to disappear," "to become in- 
visible," and "to be taken up into the peaks," should not be taken literally, 
but essentially mean to be virtually introduced to the world beyond the 
senses, in which there is no death, and removed from the visible world of 
physical bodies, which is that of common human experience. 

This tradition is by no means confined to Greece. In Buddhism men- 
tion is made of a mountain to which those who achieve spiritual enlighten- 
ment, described by the Majjhima Nikkayo as "further-men, undefeated 
and intact beings, extinct to and free from craving," are said to disappear. 
Chinese Taoist traditions speak of Mount Kuen-Lun, on which legendary 
royal beings have found the potion of immortality. Something similar is 
found in some Eastern Islamic traditions concerning people who have gone 
through initiation and have been taken to a mountain, thus being spared 
the experience of death. Ancient Egyptians talked about a mountain (Seth 
Amentet) that houses a passage through which those who are destined to 
"solar" immortality eventually enter a "triumphant land," in which, ac- 
cording to a hieroglyphic inscription, "the leaders who dwell by the throne 
of the great god proclaim their eternal life and power." 

Crossing the Atlantic Ocean, in pre-Columbian Mexico we find an 
impressive correspondence with these symbols: the great mountain 
Culhuacan (meaning "curved mountain," because its top is bent slightly 
downward) was thought of as a divine point that, regardless of its loft, 
maintained a connection with the inferior regions. According to ancient 
American traditions, some Aztec emperors were believed to have disap- 
peared in an analogous mountain. It is well known that this theme is found 
in the legends of the Western Roman-Germanic Middle Ages: mountains 



12 



Some Remarks Concerning the Divinity or the Mountains 

such as the Kyffhauser and the Odenberg were believed to be places where 
kings such as Charlemagne, Arthur, Frederick I, and Frederick II had been 
taken. These kings allegedly are not dead but are waiting for the time to 
appear again. In the cycle of the legends of the grail, we find Mount 
Monsalvat, which means, according to Guenon, "mountain of health" or 
"mountain of salvation." The battle cry of the medieval knights was 
"Montjoie." In a legend that has no historical counterpart whatsoever, but 
that nevertheless has a very rich spiritual meaning, to go through a moun- 
tain was the step preceding the sacred imperial coronation of Arthur. I 
cannot describe in detail the inner meaning of these symbols and myths, 
especially those concerning the kings who have disappeared but who are 
going to return one day. I will only say that in these myths of many differ- 
ent origins we find the common theme of the mountain conceived as a 
seat of immortality where spiritual people become realized and heroes 
disappear. 

My next remarks concern two points: the mountain as the seat of the haoma 
and of the glory and the mountain as Walhalla. 

The Iranian term haoma corresponds to the Sanskrit soma, the so- 
called potion of immortality. In these two ancient Aryan ideas we have an 
association of different concepts, partly real and partly symbolic, partly 
material and partly translatable into terms describing spiritual experience. 
Hindu traditions, for instance, describe the soma both as a god and as the 
juice of a plant that is capable of inducing feelings of exaltation. These 
feelings were highly regarded and were induced during rituals of inner 
transformation to provide a taste of immortality. 

Just as Buddha compared to a high mountain the state "in which 
there is no here nor there, no coming or going, but calmness and enlight- 
enment as in an infinite ocean" (the state of nirvana), likewise we read 
in Yashna that the mysterious haoma grows on high mountains. And so, 
once again, we find the association of the idea of heights with the idea of 
an enthusiasm capable of transforming, inspiring, and leading people to 
that which is beyond human, mortal, and ephemeral. This very same 
theme is also found in Greece in early Dionysism. According to very 
ancient testimonies, those who, during religious festivals, were possessed 



13 



Doctrine 

by the "divine frenzy of Dionysus," were led toward the wild peaks of 
the Thracian mountains by a strange and overwhelming power that arose 
in their souls. 

And yet there is something else that can correct whatever is still cha- 
otic and not completely pure at a Dionysian level; there is an ancient Ira- 
nian view, espoused by the Yasht, concerning the mountain, namely, the 
mighty Mount Ushi-darena, which is also the seat of glory. 

In the Iranian tradition, "glory" (hvareno or farr) was not an abstract 
concept. It was conceived as a real and almost physical force, although 
invisible and of nonhuman origin. Glory was generally the privilege of the 
luminous Aryan race, but more specifically it belonged to kings, priests, 
and conquerors belonging to this race. A sign gave witness to the presence 
of glory: victory. The glory was attributed to solar origins, since the sun 
was regarded as the symbol of a luminous entity that triumphed every 
morning over darkness. By transferring these concepts sub specie 
interioritatis, the glory expressed the achievements of victorious races, in 
whom superiority was power (victory) and power superiority, as in the 
solar and immortal heavenly beings. In the Yasht it is written not only that 
the plant of haoma (of Dionysian states) grows on the mountains, but also 
that the mightiest mountain, Ushi-darena, is the seat of the Aryan glory. 

As I said before, the mountain was also thought of as Walhalla. The 
word Walhalla has been popularized by Richard Wagner's operas, which 
in several instances adopt a literal interpretation of the ancient Nordic- 
Scandinavian views of the Edda, from which Wagner drew most of his 
inspiration. Such views, however, are open to deeper interpretations. 
Walhalla literally meant "the court of the fallen heroes," the king of which 
is Odin. This expresses the notion of a privileged seat of immortality (in 
these traditions, just as in the Greek ones, most people are destined to lead 
after death a dark and larval existence in the Niflheim, the Nordic equiva- 
lent of Hades), which is reserved for the nobility and the heroes who die 
on the battlefield. Almost according to the saying, "The blood of heroes is 
more precious to God than the ink of philosophers and the prayers of the 
faithful," in these ancient traditions, dying on a battlefield was the sacri- 
fice most cherished by the highest deity (Odin, Wotan, or Tiuz) and the 
most fruitful of all superhuman feats. Odin transformed the fallen soldiers 



14 



Some Remarks Concerning the Divinity of the Mountains 

into his sons and made them immortal, together with the deified kings, in 
Walhalla. This seat was often associated with Asgard, the city of the Asen, 
the divine luminous beings engaged in a perennial struggle against the 
dark creatures of the earth (elementarwesen). 

The concepts of Walhalla and Asgard originally enjoyed an immedi- 
ate relationship with the mountain, so much so that Walhalla became the 
name of Swedish and other Scandinavian mountains. Moreover, when it 
was thought to be located on ancient mountains, such as Helgafell, 
Krossholar, and Hlidskjalf, Walhalla was thought to be the seat of heroes 
and of deified rulers. Asgard is often referred to in the Edda as GUtmirbjorg, 
the "shiny mountain" or as Himinbjorg, in which the ideas of mountain 
and of luminous sky, or of a luminous, heavenly quality, are fused to- 
gether. Thus we still find the central theme of Asgard as a very high moun- 
tain, on the icy top of which an eternal brightness shines forth above the 
clouds and fog. 

When Walhalla is thought of as a mountain, it is the place from which 
the so-called Wildes Heer departs and to which it returns. This is an an- 
cient popular Nordic idea that was formulated at a higher level when it 
was associated with the army led by Odin, an army made up of fallen 
heroes. According to this tradition, the heroic sacrifice of one ' s life (which 
in the Roman tradition was called mors triumphalis and through which the 
victorious initiate joined the ranks of heroes and victorious soldiers) added 
a new recruit to that irresistible spiritual army, the Wildes Heer, which 
Odin, the god of battles, needed for an ultimate and transcendent goal: to 
fight against the ragna rokkr, namely, the destined twilight of the divine 
that lurked over the world from the distant past. 

Through these traditions, assumed in their inner meaning rather than 
in their external mythological form, we arrive at the highest view of this 
cycle of myths concerning the divinity of the mountain, which is almost 
an echo of these distant realities. Seat of awakening, of heroism, and at 
times of a transfiguring heroic death; place of an enthusiasm leading 
toward transcendent states; place of a pure asceticism and of a trium- 
phant solar force that opposes the powers that paralyze, obscure, and 
degrade life — these seem to comprise the ancients' symbolic perception 
of the mountain. This perception emerges in a cycle of legends and myths 



15 



Doctri nc 

that are endowed with many similar characteristics, the above-mentioned 
examples of which are just a few among a vast array. 

Naturally, I do not suggest espousing anachronistic evocations of myths, 
and yet this is not merely a list of curious examples from history. Behind 
the myth and the symbol that are conditioned by time there is a spirit that 
may always live again and be expressed in new forms and in new actions: 
this is what really counts. 

The best wish we can make for the new generations is that mountain 
climbing may not amount to a desecration of the mountain. Moreover, I 
sincerely hope that those deep sensations at the root of the ancients' mytho- 
logical deification of the mountain may be increasingly reawakened and 
come to exercise an enlightening influence on those who, today, led in a 
confused way by the instinct to overcome the limitations inherent in the 
everyday commercial and mechanical life of the plains, climb rocks, crests, 
and walls surrounded by the sky and by the abyss, pressing on toward icy 
and bright peaks. 



16 



3, 



Spirituality of the Mountain 



To talk about the spirituality of the mountain today is not easy, 
especially because in many cases it has become commonplace. Prob- 
ably few eras before our own have heard so much talk about the "spirit"; 
the "spirit" and the "spiritual" have almost been turned into a sort of con- 
diment used to spice all kinds of dishes. This generalization, however, is 
in stark contrast with the fact that the contemporary era truly lacks au- 
thentically transcendent principles and visions. 

We should not regard most modern references to spirituality as posi- 
tive phenomena, but rather as confused aspirations that have no value 
unless they receive further development in a true orientation, in the sense 
of a firm self-consciousness, as a result of contact with some higher real- 
ity. At this point I would like to present my thoughts concerning moun- 
tains and alpine sports, and discuss the potential for the true spirituality 
they contain. 

First of all, this potential is real and it does not have anything to do 
with the fashion trends of our era or with the short-lived enthusiasm of the 
younger generations; we know this because the spirituality of the moun- 
tain is traditional in the highest, strictest, and most universally understood 
sense of the word. I have gathered specific proof in an attempt to demon- 
strate that, since the oldest times, in almost every civilization, the moun- 
tain was uniformly regarded as the symbol of inner and transcendent states 
of being and as the allegorical seat of divine natures, of heroes, and of 
transfigured beings who had been taken beyond the mere human condi- 
tion. According to various myths, climbing the mountains or being spirited 
to the peaks symbolized a mysterious transcendent process, a spiritual 



17 



DocTRinc 

integration, and a participation in an Olympian immortality. To those who 
do not agree with the falsifying interpretation of the materialistic and ra- 
tionalistic nineteenth century, according to which the ancient myths were 
nothing but poetry and arbitrary fancies, all this assumes the value of a 
specific testimony, the most hidden meaning of which needs to be investi- 
gated. All these ancient tales — in which recur the theme of the sacredness 
of the mountain — should be regarded by those people as hints of a spiri- 
tual reality, the connection of which with the symbolism of the mountain 
cannot be accidental. Ancient men did not casually choose the mountain 
as a means to express meanings that are clearly transcendent. Rather, 
they were induced to adopt the mountain as a symbol because of the anal- 
ogy, or better, because of the foreboding that the experience of the moun- 
tain caused in the deepest recesses of their being, provided this experi- 
ence is adequately cultivated. 

To further analyze what the mountain symbolizes, it is first necessary 
to reject all the contemporary interpretations of the spirituality of the moun- 
tain and of mountain climbing. In other words, it is necessary to limit its 
scope to subordinate its various conditioned points of view to one absolute 
point of view. 

The first of the current assumptions is the purely lyrical view of the 
mountain. I am referring to the world of literary rhetoric and poetry of 
the worst kind that consists of bourgeois sentimentalism and conven- 
tional and stereotypical idealism. From this perspective, the mountain is 
seen as part of the landscape, from a distance, and is represented as 
"picturesque." Poets describe the mountain in brilliant and exhilarating 
terms that lack serious content and do not express a sincere and direct 
experience. The mountain man and the true mountain climber do not 
share in this rhetoric. This rhetoric, which is confined to the aesthetic 
world of books, is fortunately no longer fashionable, since it is now seen 
as the residue of nineteenth-century romanticism and as the compensa- 
tion of a bourgeois generation that only yearned for the snowy peaks 
through easy verbal enthusiasm and for common places through verbal 
lyricism. 

Second, we find the spirituality of the mountain conceived in terms of 
naturalism. This is the view of a generation characterized by an opposite 



18 



Spirituality of the Mountain 

sentiment to that which I have just described; this generation may be char- 
acterized as "the generation of the crisis," which, by and large, is a Ger- 
man product. Out of an obscure need for an organic, biological, and even 
psychic compensation, and out of an instinctive revolt against a civiliza- 
tion that had become synonymous with dry intellectualism, with mechani- 
cal forces, with utilitarianism, and with conformism, what has occurred is 
an exodus toward nature and the emergence of an absolute need for the 
mountain to represent that which is anticity and anticulture. Thus, what 
has arisen is a new primitivist mysticism in regard to nature and the sports 
practiced in nature. This new primitivism takes up again most of Jean- 
Jacques Rousseau's ideas and the same indictment of civilization that was 
promoted by people like Nordau, Freud> Lessing, Bergmann, and Klanges. 

In regard to this phenomenon, it is important to avoid misunderstand- 
ings. Obviously, there is nothing wrong with the idea that people need to 
rest, relax, and derive new strength from contact with nature and the moun- 
tain. Indeed, this is desirable; therefore mountain sports assume a role of 
social renovation of unquestionable value. And yet, we should not con- 
fuse what are very distinct realities and conclude that more or less physi- 
cal sensations of well-being and organic refreshment have something to 
do with spirituality; nor should we believe that a man immersed in a cli- 
mate of primitivist and naturalist practice is any closer to the essential part 
of his own being than when he is involved in the disciplines and the struggles 
of civilized life. Escapism, the reaction that accompanies it, and this exal- 
tation of nature, in most cases are enough — due to their negative charac- 
teristics — to limit the scope of naturalism. The plane on which the spiri- 
tual personality may realize or strengthen its sense of itself is beyond both 
civilization (in the limited, materialistic, social, and intellectualist senses 
the term has assumed in recent times) and anticivilization, which is namely 
"nature" understood as a mere antithesis to civilized society. This is the 
plane I am talking about, not that of the conditions and the best ways to 
repair or preserve bodies and brains that have been negatively affected 
by the material and psychic poisons of modern life. 

Third, it is necessary to overcome the attitude that holds the spiritual- 
ity of the mountain and of mountain climbing in terms of mere sensations 
of physical heroism; this is the attitude of the elite who practice climbing 



19 



DOCTIIBE 

seriously and actively. The mountain is spirit in all that it involves: disci- 
pline of the nerves and body, clear-minded courage, desire for conquest, 
and the impulse to engage in pure action in an environment of pure forces. 
Now, anything that contains a highly educational value deserves to be 
further qualified. Such a qualification concerns once again the finalities. 
Just as naturalism has its reasons for being at a certain plane, likewise 
mountain climbing has its own reasons for serving as a school for the pre- 
viously mentioned qualities. It is undoubtedly desirable that the younger 
generations become capable of that spirit of boldness and of that 
psychophysical fitness that results from the active pursuit of mountain climb- 
ing. But is this the highest level to which they may aspire? 

When we examine the inner aspect of this issue, that is, leaving out of 
consideration qualities of the younger generations that can and should be 
appreciated (such as health, energy, and self-discipline), we cannot help 
but notice the presence among our young people, of love for risk and even 
of heroism. Quite often the value of these qualities amounts to a mere 
sensation and their end result is the exasperating view of personality and 
virility as purely physical, hard, and closed. This modern view is already 
abnormally developed and it certainly does not constitute the best condi- 
tion for the reattainment of a true, liberated, and transcendent spirituality. 
It must be recognized that mountain climbing, when experienced only in 
keeping with this view, would not be easily distinguished from the pursuit 
of emotions for their own sake. This pursuit of radical sensations gener- 
ates, especially in the United States, all kinds of extravagant and desper- 
ate feats and bold acrobatic activities, such as jumping in midair from one 
plane to another, daredevil stunts, extreme sports, and so on. All things 
considered, these things do not differ very much from other excitements or 
drugs, the employment of which suggests the absence rather than the pres- 
ence of a true sense of personality, and also the need to be stunned rather 
than to possess oneself. Even the technical component in mountain climb- 
ing may easily degenerate; we often find climbers who are automatically 
inclined, out of habit, to engage in all kinds of ascents, including that of 
skyscrapers. 

However, it is certain that if there is an element that is open to under- 
standing a superior realization in the experience of the mountain, it is the 



20 



Spirituality of the Mountain 

emotional or sensory element; and yet it is essential to see in that only a 
starting point, the raw material, and to consider sensory experience as 
only a means and not as an end in itself. 

Modern man has a totally wrong attitude in regard to what he feels. 
Sensation is to him something that begins and ends in itself and in relation 
to which he is passive. He is too weak to separate from a sensation or an 
emotion the purely irrational element, or that which in this sensation is 
merely an impression or an inner turmoil. He is incapable of deriving from 
it, with an inner action, something that may be used directly and actively 
by the spirit as superior knowledge. 

This is also the case of the experience of the mountain. Those who are 
irresistibly attracted to the mountains have often only experienced in an 
emotion a greatness that is beyond their understanding. They have not learned 
to master a new inner state emerging from the deepest recesses of their 
beings. Thus, they do not know why they seek increasingly wider horizons, 
freer skies, tougher peaks; or why, from peak to peak, from wall to wall, and 
from danger to danger, through their experiences they have become inex- 
plicably disillusioned with everything that, in their ordinary lives, appeared 
to them as most lively, important, and exciting. That which appeals to them 
and moves them is the powerful inner message that is directly evident in 
everything in the mountains. The mountain can be destructive and is awe- 
some in its greatness, its solitude, its inaccessibility, its silence, the primor- 
dial nature of its storms, its immutability through the succession of seasons 
and the constant formation and dissolution of the cloud banks — all these 
things should be regarded as intimations of immortality. 

Thus, the mountain could serve as a symbol, and as such it could lead 
to a corresponding inner realization. More often than not, man stops at the 
emotional level, which usually has a perturbing quality rather than a feel- 
ing of conquest and special knowledge. The irrationality of impressions, 
visions, of inexplicable elan, and gratuitous acts of heroism urge man for- 
ward along ascending paths; thus, he eventually begins to act from an 
interior motive. It is in the context of the subconscious that he finds him- 
self introduced to a wider reality through which he is transformed to a 
state of calmness, self-sufficiency, simplicity, purity. Moreover, he receives 
an almost supernatural inflow of energies that cannot be explained through 



21 



DocTRrnc 

the determinism of physiology. He also feels an indomitable will to keep 
on going, to commit himself again, to challenge new peaks, new abysses, 
new faces. It is precisely in this drive that we find inadequate the transla- 
tion of the material action in regard to its meaning (the transcendence of 
the spiritual impulse in relation to external conditions), to the deeds, the 
visions, and the bold actions that have propagated its awakening and that 
still constitute the necessary material for the concrete expression of that 
very drive. 

I do not think it is hasty to conclude that this determination must have 
been the secret behind the greatest mountain feats ever performed, those 
feats that seem to have really transcended the limits of ordinary human 
possibilities. And yet this level of accomplishment should be accompa- 
nied by true realization, by overcoming the instinctive and irrational ele- 
ment, and by a full and unwavering self-awareness, namely, the transfor- 
mation of the experience of the mountain into a way of being. Then what 
would arise in the best subjects is the feeling that every mountain excur- 
sion, every climb, every conquest, and every daring feat are only means 
through which he expresses an immaterial reality that he could also ex- 
press in other ways. This then is the strength of those who may be said to 
never return from the peaks to the plains. This is the strength of those for 
whom there is no longer going out or coming back because the mountain is 
in their spirit, because the symbol has become reality, and because all 
dross has been shed. For these people the mountain is no longer a new 
adventure or a romantic escape or a sensory high, or heroism for its own 
sake or a sport carried to new technical heights. Rather the mountain is 
connected to something that has no beginning and no end and that, having 
become an inalienable spiritual conquest, has become part of one's na- 
ture, something one carries everywhere that bestows a new meaning to 
every action, every experience, and every struggle in everyday life. 

In this way, beyond the natural symbol of the mountain, which is di- 
rectly perceived by the senses, we can access its doctrinal and traditional 
symbolism, namely, the deeper content of all the previously mentioned 
ancient myths in which the mountain appears as the seat of divine natures, 
immortalizing substances, forces of a solar and supernatural regality (for 
example, the solar mountain referred to in the traditions of the Hellenized 



22 



Spirituality of the Mountain 

Roman Empire and the mountain as the seat of Mazdean glory), a spiri- 
tual center (Mount Meru and the other symbolic mountains conceived as 
poles), and so forth. In fact, in all this we see the various depictions, per- 
sonifications, and projections of transcendent states of consciousness, of 
inner awakenings and enlightenments. These projections are said to be 
real when they no longer represent something vague, mystical, or fantas- 
tic, but rather when they are perceived according to the evidence and 
normalcy of a superior order that regards as abnormal everything that was 
previously regarded as familiar and habitual. 

It is possible that the ancients, who ignored mountain climbing or only 
knew some rudimentary techniques (and therefore knew the mountain as 
an inaccessible and inviolable entity), were consequently led to experi- 
ence it as a symbol and as a transcendent spirituality. Considering that 
today the mountain has been physically conquered and that there are few 
peaks that man has not yet reached, it is important to keep the conquest 
from being debased and from losing its higher meaning. Thus, it is neces- 
sary that the younger generations gradually come to appreciate action at 
the level of ritual and that they slowly succeed in finding again a transcen- 
dent reference point. It is through this reference point that the feats of 
audacity, risk, and conquest as well as the disciplines of the body, the 
senses, and the will that are practiced in the immovable, great, and sym- 
bolic mountain peaks, lead men to the realization that all in man is beyond 
himself. In this way these feats will be justified in the context of the spiri- 
tual revolutionary movement that is currently emerging among our people. 



23 



t 



A Mystic of the Tibetan Mountains 



Milarepa was a strange Tibetan ascetic and poet who lived around 
the eleventh century a.d. He is credited with a revival of the meta- 
physical doctrine of Northern Buddhism, or Mahayana, in the form of a 
tradition that has been transmitted orally up to our time. His teachings are 
known in the form of songs that include descriptions of some episodes of 
his life. I believe my readers will find it interesting to briefly explore this 
mysticism, in which the impressions made by high mountains, the struggle 
with the elements, various symbols, doctrines, and the allusion to enig- 
matic phenomena of a supernatural type are intimately interconnected. I 
will first summarize the narrative parts of Milarepa's poems. 

Six months had gone by since the ascetic Milarepa, having taken to the 
high mountains near the great glaciers, had been caught with little food in 
a snowstorm that had isolated the mountain peaks from the rest of the 
world. Believing that Milarepa had died, his disciples made the sacrificial 
offerings prescribed for the dead. At the beginning of spring they went to 
look for him, forging a path through the snow, wishing to retrieve the body 
of their teacher. 

During one stop in the glaciers a snow leopard appeared to them. They 
began to follow it when suddenly, to their astonishment, it turned into a 
tiger. At the entrance of the Cave of the Demons, they heard a voice sing- 
ing a song, which they recognized as Milarepa's, and immediately ran 
inside to embrace their teacher, it was he who had projected the images of 
the leopard and the tiger through a far-reaching illusion, having sensed his 
approaching disciples. 



25 



D CTR i n E 



A Mystic of the Tibetan Mountains 



He told them how, during his contemplation, although eating almost 
nothing, he had not felt the need for food; that during the feast days, the 
aerial spirits of the peaks had brought to him the essence of the offerings 
made to him by his friends; and that when his disciples, believing Milarepa 
to have died, had begun to make offerings, these became for him a sort of 
food that made him feel satiated and he wanted nothing. 

At his disciples' request, Milarepa agreed to suspend his ascetic prac- 
tices in the mountains and descend to the plateau, where, at the news of 
his safe return, a rejoicing crowd gathered. Milarepa, questioned by the 
people, told the story of his stay on the mountain peak and how he was 
able to endure the elements, the icy temperatures, and the raging wind, 
thus overcoming the invisible forces (the "demons") disguised as snow. 
Then he offered his teachings. 



The Song of the Snow 

At the end of the Tiger Year, before the Rabbit Year 

began, on the sixth day of Wa Jal, a sense of renunciation 

grew within me. 

To the remote Lashi snow mountain came Milarepa, the 

anchorite who clings to solitude. 

Heaven and earth held a council; a wind that tears the skin 

was sent 

The rivers ran and torrents surged; black clouds swept in 

from all directions. 

The sun and the moon were shut in darkness and the 

twenty-eight constellations were fixed in place; the Milky 

Way was pegged-down and the eight planets were tied by 

an iron chain. 

The firmament was wrapped in fog; in the mist, snow fell 

for nine days and nights. Then more and more for a further 

eighteen nights and days. 

The snow fell, big as bags of wool, fell like bkds flying in 

the sky, fell like a whirling swarm of bees. 

Flakes fell small as a spindle 's wheel, fell as tiny as bean 

seed, fell like tufts of cotton. 



The snowfall was beyond all measure. Snow covered the 

whole mountain and even touched the sky, falling through 

the bushes and weighing down the trees. 

In this great disaster I remained in utter solitude. 

The snow, the wintry blast, and my thin cotton garment 

fought against each other on the white mountain. The 

snow, as it fell on me, turned into drizzle. I conquered the 

raging winds, subduing them to silent rest. 

The cotton cloth I wore was like a burning brand. 

The struggle was of life and death, as when giants wrestle 

and sabers clash. 

I, the competent yogi, was victorious; my power over the 

vital heat (tumo) and the two channels was thus shown. 

By observing carefully the Four Bis caused by meditation 

and keeping to the inner practice, the cold and the warm 

pranas became the essence. This was why the raging wind 

grew tame and the storm, subdued, lost its power. 

Not even the devas ' army could compete with me. This 

battle, I, the yogi, won. 

Son of a lion, of all beasts the king, Ihave everHvedin 

snow mountains: no need to worry about me. 

If you believe what this old man tells, Dharma will grow 

and spread afar. 



The Song of Joy 

In answer to my disciples y questioning, this is the happy 

song the old man sings! The falling snow enclosed my 

house of meditation; goddesses gave me food and 

sustenance. 

By observing my own mind, all things are seen; by sitting in 

a lowly place, the royal throne is reached. 

I, Milarepa, came to the Lashi Snow Mountain to occupy 

alone the Ca ve of the Demons. For six full months, the 

experiences of meditation grew. I now disclose them in this, 

the song of the Six Essences of Meditative Experiences. 



26 



27 



DoaRint 

If there be obstacles, it cannot be called space; if there be 

numbers, it cannot be called stars. 

One cannot say, "This is a mountain, " if it moves and 

shakes. 

It cannot be an ocean should it grow or shrink. 

One cannot be called a swimmer if he needs a bridge. 

It is not a rainbow if it can be grasped. 

These are the Six Outer Parables. 

The limits of the defimte restrict understanding. 
Drowsiness and distractions are not meditation. 
Acceptance and rejection are not acts of will. 
A constant flow of thought is not yoga. 
If there be East and West, it is not wisdom. 
If birth and death, it is not Buddha. 
These are the Six Inner Faults. 

Great faith; reliance on a wise and strict guru; 
good discipline, solitude in hermitage; determined, 
persevering practice; and meditation — these are the 
Six Ways that lead to liberation. 

The original inborn wisdom is the sphere of primordial 
depth. Without exterior or interior is the sphere of aware- 
ness; without brightness or darkness is the sphere of 
insight; omnipresent and all-embracing is the sphere of 
Dharma; without mutation or transition is the sphere of tig 
Le; without interruption is the sphere of experience. 
These are the Six Unshakable Realms of Essence. 
I sing this song of Six Essences of my experiences last 
winter while meditating. 

The anguish of the heart that considers real that which has 
conditioned existence is overcome; the darkness of the 
illusion generated by lack of knowledge is dissolved. 
The white lotus of the intellectual vision opens up; the 
torch of a clear self-consciousness is lit; wisdom awakens. 
Is my spirit really awake? 



28 



A Mystic of the Tibetan Mountains 

When I look up to the blue sky, the emptiness of what 

exists is clearly evident to me and I do not fear the 

doctrine of the reality of things. 

When Hook at the sun and the moon, enlightenment arises 

in a distinct manner within my consciousness and I do not 

fear spiritual dullness and torpor. 

When Hook to the mountain peaks, the immutable object 

of contemplation is clearly perceived by my consciousness 

and I do not fear the unceasing changes of mere theories. 

When Hook down to the river below, the idea of continuity 

clearly arises in my consciousness, thus I do not fear 

unforeseeable events. 

When I see the rainbow, the emptiness of phenomena is 

experienced in the most central part of my inner being and 

I fear neither that which endures, nor that which passes 

away. 

When I see the image of the moon reflected by the water, 

self-liberation, freed from all concerns, clearly appears to 

my consciousness and I do not fear stupidity and frivolity. 



The Song of the Essence of Things 

The storm, the thunder, the clouds from the south. When 

they arise, they arise from the sky; when they disappear 

they do so into the sky. 

The rainbow, the fog, and the mist. When they arise, they 

arise from the air; when they disappear they do so into the 

air. 

The substance of all fruits and of every crop comes from 

the earth; when it disappears it does so into the earth. 

Rivers, waves, and sea foam. When they arise, they arise 

from the ocean; when they disappear they do so into the 

ocean. 

Passions, yearning, and greed. When they arise, they arise 

from the mind; when they disappear they do so into the 

mind. 

Wisdom, enlightenment, liberation. When they arise, they 



29 



DocTRinc 



arise from the mind; when they disappear, they do so into 
the mind. 

The freedom from rebirth, the unconditioned, the ineffable, 
when they arise, they arise from being; when they disap- 
pear, they do so into being. 

That which is regarded as a demon, when it arises, it arises 
from within the ascetic; when it disappears, it does so into 
the ascetic, since these apparitions are only an illusory 
game of the inner essence. 

By realizing the true nature of the mind, it is possible to 
realize that the state of enlightenment does not come, nor 
does it leave. 

When the mind, which is deluded by the apparition of the 
external world, has finally understood the teaching 
concerning the phenomena, it experiences that there is no 
difference whatsoever between phenomena and empti- 
ness. When the true nature of the mind is compared to that 
of ether, the essence of truth is properly understood. 



5, 



Race and the Mountain 



According to the main tenet of the doctrine of race, the qualities of a 
race are essentially hereditary factors. The environment exercises 
its influence but is not a decisive factor, since by itself it cannot generate 
permanent modifications that will be passed on as new legacies. Never- 
theless, the environment assumes a special importance wherever there 
are types containing different hereditary factors due to previous racial 
inter-breeding. In these cases, the environment may act in such a way as 
to encourage the development of some of these factors instead of others, 
which may be inhibited or reduced to a latent state. On this basis, the 
environment is a factor that should be carefully considered wherever the 
question of trait-selection arises. A certain environment may test the vari- 
ety of inherited dispositions and measure their strength; it may cause a 
discrimination; and it may even isolate and stabilize a predominant type 
when it presents the same conditions for a sufficiently long time. 

The above-mentioned passing remarks are meant to constitute a gen- 
eral premise for some considerations I intend to present These consider- 
ations concern the meaning the experience of the mountain has for an ac- 
tive view of the race, namely, the view that intends to give a greater empha- 
sis, in the Italian people, to the qualities and gifts of the Aryan-Roman type. 
I have said "experience of the mountain" and not simply "the moun- 
tain" because I am not referring to the people who inhabit the alpine ar- 
eas. In this context I would like to address the effect of the experience and 
of the habit of the mountain on those who do not belong to this environ- 
ment, and to whom the mountain represents an opportunity to react against 
the dull pace of everyday life. 



30 



31 



Doctrioc 

Moreover, I do not intend to write about the physiological and psycho- 
logical effects of mountain climbing, the beneficial and reintegrating as- 
pect of which is common knowledge. Rather, I wish to focus on the aspect 
of trait selection and of character formation. 

First, anybody who agrees with the predominant view according to 
which the original stock of the conquering Aryan race became differenti- 
ated from other peoples and asserted itself in the events and in the particu- 
larly harsh environment of the end of the glacial age will also acknowl- 
edge that, if there is a natural environment that might encourage the emer- 
gence of an analogous inner form, this is the mountainous environment — 
especially those areas where great glaciers and high peaks are to be found. 
In this case, the evocation of a primordial legacy may unfold under the 
right conditions, without imposing a priori an organic acclimatization on 
those who, after millennia spent away from the ancestors' homeland, at- 
tempted to derive positive experiences from a prolonged experience of 
the arctic regions. 

Second, by virtue of its primordial nature, its elements, its distance 
from the petty world of the thoughts and feelings of the domesticated and 
rationalistic modern man, the mountain also invites people, in a spiritual 
way, to return to their origins, to the inner realization of something that 
reflects the simplicity, the greatness, the pure force, and the untouchabil- 
ity of the world of the icy and bright peaks. The fact that almost every 
ancient tradition knew the symbolism of the mountain — conceiving the 
mountain peaks as the seat of either divine and Olympian forces, or of 
heroes and transfigured men — confirms the evocative power I have just 
attributed to the mountain. It is necessary to emphasize this point: talking 
about a return to the origins and reconstructing human types, forms of 
civilization, and styles of ancient times is always going to amount to mere 
intellectualism and to a sterile nostalgia, unless one achieves a direct sense 
of what is primordial. Only nature can help in this task. I mean nature in 
whose aspects no room is left for what is beautiful, romantic, picturesque; 
I mean when nature ceases to speak to man; I mean nature that is substan- 
tiated by greatness and pure forces. Therefore, I would not refrain from 
saying that he who has conquered the mountain, namely, he who has 
learned to adapt himself to its fundamental meaning, already possesses a 



32 



Race and the Mountain 

key to comprehending the original spirit and the spirit of the Aryan- 
Roman world in its most severe, pure, and monumental aspects. Such a 
key is not to be found in ordinary culture and scholarship. 

Now I wish to discuss four elements of form. All those who are serious 
about mountain climbing, who climb ridges, walls, overhanging rocks, icy 
pathways, and narrow ledges, embody a common way of being. The main 
features of which resemble the features that were typically exemplified by 
the Aryan-Roman and Aryan-Nordic races and are also very different from 
those of a certain "Mediterranean" human type. In all this I am inclined to 
see the effect of a natural selection, and almost of a renewal, which occurs 
as the result of specific tasks, trials, and also a special environment. 

The first characteristic is sparsity of words and reduced verbal com- 
munication. The mountain teaches silence; it discourages idle chatter, use- 
less words, and exuberant and pointless effusive outbursts. It promotes 
simplification and the turning of one's attention inward. In an alpine envi- 
ronment, gestures and signals are more eloquent than long speeches. This 
is especially true when one is busy climbing, or making holes on the 
mountain's face, or crossing ravines; in these circumstances one instinc- 
tively adopts a military style and a terseness in warning, giving instruc- 
tions, or confirming. This style can be extended from climbing to life in the 
mountains in general. It is true that sometimes one encounters relapses, 
especially among young people who do not shun noise and exuberance 
when staying at mountain shelters. And yet these relapses do not affect 
the essential, and have the value of juxtaposing this attitude with that found 
among true climbers and more qualified people, to whom the mountain is 
much more than a sporadic adventure and a fleeting emotion. 

The second feature of serious mountain climbers, which is immedi- 
ately connected to the first, is inner discipline: a total control of reflexes; 
the style of a deliberate, lucid, and purposeful action; a boldness that is 
not reckless or hasty, but which is connected to the knowledge of one's 
limitations and strengths and of the exact terms of the problems to be 
solved. In relation to this characteristic, we also find yet another one: the 
control of one's imagination and the capability to immediately neutral- 
ize any useless and harmful inner turmoil. These elements have much in 
common with the traits of ascetics, but here they are put into practice as 



33 



Dqctkide 

the presuppositions of any relevant climbing excursion. A lucid concen- 
tration, fit for the purpose, this is yet another trait that the experience of 
the mountain awakens and stabilizes, until it transforms it in many people 
into a natural way of being or into some kind of habit. He who, when 
walking across an open icy ridge, thinks about something other than the 
next foot-step; or he who, during a climb, allows himself to think about 
the danger and the void yawning beneath him, instead of fixing his mind 
on the rapid and exact solution to the various questions of weight, equi- 
librium, and the right grip — such a person will hardly return a second 
time to the mountain, even if he still yearns for adventure. To return to 
the mountain; to face and to love the risks; to master the proper tech- 
nique — all this means to give to one's being a certain form, which in 
some people eventually influences everyday, ordinary behavior. The 
active realism — that lucid and perfectly mastered instinct, that style of a 
spirit that keeps the soul and any irrational reaction under total control, 
are also the main characteristics of the Aryan-Nordic and Aryan-Roman 
style. It is true that analogous traits can also be developed in other sports, 
yet the experience of the mountain contains a number of elements that 
lead to their spiritualization, thus eliminating the danger of mechaniza- 
tion befalling those who have become a bundle of well-controlled re- 
flexes. 

Third, the experience of the mountain empowers one to act, to per- 
form without spectators, and to display a heroism that shuns rhetoric and 
grandiose gestures. Again, it is the environment itself that brings about 
this purification of action, the overcoming of vanity, and an active disin- 
terest. While the "Mediterranean type" is characterized by the need for a 
public and by the inclination to behave in a theatrical manner, the experi- 
ence of the mountain is one of the best antidotes against this Mediterra- 
nean component that may remain in our Italian souls. Those who really 
practice mountain climbing learn an opposite joy to that of the Mediterra- 
nean type, namely the joy of being alone, of being left to one's self amid 
the changelessness of things, alone with one's action and contemplation. 
The fact that in the great majority of alpine feats people are roped to each 
other does not contradict the above-mentioned point, because there is no 
serious climber who at some point did not tackle the mountain alone. The 



34 



Race and the Mountain 

other people he is roped with are never an audience; they are elements of 
a single unit who perform different tasks in the course of a common ac- 
tion. Everybody knows that a person in a roped party is expected to do 
much more than if he were alone, considering the consequences that an 
imprudent action or a weakness could have for others. 

This leads me to consider a fourth characteristic, which I refer to as a 
special way of being and of acting together. Camaraderie, in this context, 
is too generic an expression. Here the connection is more individual and 
personal. Sentiment and affection play more minor roles than in the ge- 
neric cases of camaraderie, yet with the effect of greater intensity. An- 
other way to put it is to be simultaneously alone and with other people — a 
connection occurring essentially through action. To lead and show the way 
is just an example of the tasks that must always be fulfilled through strength. 
Maybe only some forms of camaraderie, forged during wartime on the 
battlefield, may bring about, like the experience of the mountain, this spe- 
cial sense of active solidarity, which keeps a distance between people and 
yet presupposes the full harmony of their forces because of the precise 
assessment of and trust in each member's potential. 

This is virility without ostentation and mutual help without hesitation, 
among people who are on the same plane; it is based on a freely chosen 
and common goal. 

Thus, this latter element, when compared to it, reminds us of the type 
of community that was one of the most characteristic elements of the an- 
cient Aryan races and the Aryan-Roman people; this type of community 
had nothing to do with socialism. Its foundation was neither a collective 
entity nor individualism, but rather personality. Its law was action; in it 
there were relationships of real men, cemented by trust, loyalty and truth- 
fulness, not to mention the shared dignity of belonging to the same race. 
Subordination did not humiliate people in this type of society, because of 
the precise vision of the whole and because of the vision shared by each 
individual. 

These are the main elements that, through the natural selection of the 
environment and by the test of action, are most cherished by those who 
take the mountain experience seriously. These people, with a significant 
degree of uniformity, tend to rectify or neutralize other inclinations and 



35 



DocTRinc 

qualities that are emphasized in life on the plains and in the great cities. 
Nothing is created out of nothing; thus, the present considerations do not 
apply to the completely bastardized modern man who has been reduced to 
a working and sporting animal. These considerations apply instead to those 
in whom the sense of race (race in a spiritual, higher sense) still means 
something and, rather, represents the main departing point for a will ori- 
ented toward liberation and awakening. In these people, the mountainous 
milieu awakens a primordial legacy and possibly contributes to the gradual 
emergence of a transcendent sense of freedom — which does not signify 
escapism, but is instead a principle of pure strength. This sense of freedom 
finds its most perfect expression within one's limited self, in concentra- 
tion, in a deliberate action, in the complete, lucid dominion of the irratio- 
nal part of the human being, and finally, in the readiness to be freely trans- 
formed into an element of solid action, in which the goal is located above 
everybody and everything else. 



36 



6 



The Mountain, Sport, 
and Contemplation 



In a recent publication of the Italian Mountain Association, I came across 
a polemic. Far from wanting to fuel this quarrel, I intend to make some 
general comments that will serve as a reference point for my readers. 

The quarrel is about the meaning of true mountain climbing. Carlo 
Anguissola d'Emet has taken a position against an overly technical ap- 
proach to climbing, which he characterizes as follows: 

A real climber cannot be somebody who does not love, un- 
derstand, and pursue the fifth or sixth degree. A climber is 
someone who carries ropes, nails, hooks, shoes, snaplinks, 
sleeping bag, and a lot of equipment during his excursions. A 
climber is one who has repeatedly bivouacked on the walls, 
connected to nails, [and] slept in the open under the rain or 
during a storm, waiting for the break of dawn. 

Anguissola deplores that in the periodicals devoted to mountain climbing 
this technical approach is increasingly predominant, so much so that the 
only things that matter these days are degrees of difficulty or this or that 
school of mountain climbing. Moreover, he complains that it is possible to 
notice an increasingly snobbish attitude in young people, who display col- 
orful sweaters, pipes in their mouths, and big patches from various ski or 
climbing schools, all the while flaunting technical jargon. 

Anguissola definitely admits the "usefulness of certain notions of 
climbing," yet claims that the casualty of the overemphasis on technique 



37 



Doctri nc 

is the qualitative aspect of mountain climbing. Worse yet, the latter' s spon- 
taneous, original, and sincere character is suffocated. The result is the 
diminution of the contemplation of and direct contact with one of the most 
grandiose forms of nature. The American passion for records seems to 
have become a predominant concern. It seems that the true climber is one 
who taunts those who love the mountain in all of its forms, whether they 
be high peaks, such as Mount Cervino or Mount Lavaredo, or plateaus. 
True mountain lovers, while being experienced climbers, still give prior- 
ity to the contemplative interest and the impulse to establish contact with 
a world that helps one forget the mechanical and dull life of the modern 

cities. 

Anguissola was rebuffed by P. Marimonti on the pages of the same 
review. Marimonti claimed that such an argument is outdated and that the 
only thing that matters is "what is a great climbing feat, and in what man- 
ner it is carried out." He proceeded to quote the words of Emilio Comici: 

In order to really feel the power of the mountain, it is neces- 
sary to confront a wall of the fifth or sixth degree of diffi- 
culty. Those who have never tried it before cannot judge oth- 
ers who have. We do not go to the mountain just to practice a 

contemplative form of climbing This takes place only 

during days of rest, when, in contemplation, we dream of a 
beautiful and difficult feat. 

According to Marimonti, these words of Comici' s characterize the most 
complete form of mountain climbing, and he added: "Not all those who 
take to the mountain have the necessary qualities to understand it." In his 
view, the people who are closer to understanding the mountain are those 
who "attend with profit schools and courses of mountain climbing." 

Thus, there seems to be a conflict of interpretations. To clarify mat- 
ters, I would like to acknowledge and deplore, with Marimonti, the exist- 
ence of relevant literature that "more often than not represents a rhetori- 
cal outburst rather than expressing true feelings." The mountain as an 
ideal place to induce sweet and poetic feelings, a place that delights people 
with beautiful sunsets and starry nights, belongs to an outdated generation 
that was infected with bourgeois sentimentalism and romanticism. The 



38 



The Mountain, Sport, and Contemplation 

mountain itself appears to me to be the best antidote to similar deviations. 
In few of its manifestations does nature give us the sense of what, in its 
greatness, purity, power, and primordial nature, is far above the insignifi- 
cant lives and artificial lyricism of ordinary people. In my view, such a 
catharsis, and such a removal of the I from the shallow world of mere 
subjectivity and its literary and psychological appendices, ought to be the 
first salutary effect derived from the practice of true mountain climbing, 
and also the reason why climbing in its essence ought to be regarded by 
the best elements as something more than mere sport. 

Is this a matter of contemplation? Let me explain. This word has dif- 
ferent meanings. The most current meaning is the one that has been pro- 
faned the most. According to it, contemplation signifies flights of fantasy 
and a passive abiding in the impressions and in the inner repercussions of 
spectacular views. Originally, contemplation referred to asceticism and 
signified something else altogether: it represented a sphere superior to 
"active life" (in some cases culminating in it), characterized by the over- 
coming of the ordinary and individual sense of one's self. The correspond- 
ing Greek term, theoria, implies a through-and-through inner realization 
or identification: consciousness that lives directly in its object. When we 
talk of catharsis, or of purification as an overcoming of that which is sub- 
jective, sentimental, and bourgeois thanks to the experience of the moun- 
tain, we can refer to this older and more austere meaning of the contem- 
plative dimension. 

At this point we ought to wonder, of all those who take to the moun- 
tain, how many possess the necessary qualities to understand, or better, 
to welcome the transforming power of the experience of the mountain? 
Moreover, we ought to wonder whether the ones closer to it are those 
who concentrate on the technical preparations and on the love of effort 
and risk, despising contemplative feelings (which, judging from the quoted 
words, amount to "dreaming of a beautiful and difficult conquest during 
times of rest"). The right perspective seems to me to fall above both 
extremes. 

I believe that on the mountain contemplation and action ought to be 
two inseparable elements of an organic whole, outside of which they 
immediately lose their specific and higher meaning. In order to realize 



39 



DocTRint 

this, let us take the two terms separately and thus reach absurd conclu- 
sions. The limit of a contemplation without action can be realized on an 
airplane. Sitting comfortably in first class on the Venice-Munich or the 
Venice-Vienna route, flying several thousand feet above sea level, one 
might enjoy the magnificent and vast view of the Alps and the sky (es- 
pecially in wintertime). This view would be much more beautiful than 
that available for contemplations (in the restricted sense of the word) 
that can be experienced from the highest peaks, climbed with much ef- 
fort and concentration. 

As far as action without contemplation is concerned, think about those 
acrobatic feats performed on a rope suspended between two skyscrapers, 
or on a trapeze, in which everything depends on the exact and flawless 
execution of a jump. I wonder if the schools of mountain climbing have 
truly much more to offer on the matter of discipline in the face of danger, 
control of one's reflexes, and technique. It is clear therefore, that the two 
things have their respective relative values: mountain climbing is an im- 
portant and serious business — and educational in a superior and not only 
in a degraded and modern sense — only when it involves a special action 
that derives its meaning from contemplation and when it includes a spe- 
cial contemplation that derives its meaning from action. 

It can hardly be disputed that the technical character of modern al- 
pinism (which is most often based on the quest for new records, on in- 
creasing difficulties, on the wall that has never been attempted before, 
even when it is possible to get to the top through other ways), with its 
inevitable mechanical quality, often represents a regression in regard to 
the above-mentioned holistic approach. The spiritual lesson that the 
mountain has to offer those who climb, having been called and chosen 
by it, no school of fifth or sixth degree can offer. Quite frankly, repeti- 
tion and experience inevitably lead to a dulling of sensibility — at least, 
this is what my own personal experience has taught me. 

That which one learns from the peaks and glaciers by traveling alone, 
with a minimal knowledge of technique, becomes less of a learning expe- 
rience after a routine has been established, after one has learned danger- 
ous techniques and trained his mind to concentrate on the best solution to 
the next technical problem presented by the next step in the ice and by the 



40 



The Mountain, Sport, and Contemplation 

next grip on the rock. This is a very helpful way for training oneself in a 
sportslike manner and for educating body and nerves, but it inevitably 
leads to the extinction of the spiritual experience of the mountain and also 
reduces the opportunities for catharsis that may be contained therein. Let 
us not confuse the issue by talking about the mountain as "a great school 
of courage, a school of climbing mountain men who specialize in great 
feats." Those feats are specializations: forms which of course have a high 
value, although only in their own limited fields. In this context the moun- 
tain appears merely as an X degree of difficulty, which has to be over- 
come through appropriate means in relation to a special form of action 
oriented to a Y goal, just like a military action. This very circumscribed 
context allows no room for considerations of a superior order. 

It is also a fact that in recent generations there are evident symptoms 
of increasing materialism and mechanization in mountain climbing, 
which— especially in regard to the mania for records and the pursuit of 
difficulty for its own sake— is somewhat influenced by the American men- 
tality and by its frivolous obsession with sports. Another danger— caused 
by other factors— is the "mass" phenomenon, that invades the mountains, 
which unavoidably brings a plebeian quality and causes the loss of spiri- 
tual quality, the level and value of the experience. Finally, there is a spe- 
cial snobbery, exemplified by those who act like new Trenkers, 1 with a 
mixture of false simplicity and ostentation. 

And thus in the mountains, especially during the winter and summer 
seasons, there is no longer any room. It will be great luck if the best climb- 
ers are able to overcome the already mentioned limitations and find again 
in the mountains and the peaks the ways of a really wholesome experi- 
ence, of some kind of silent ascesis and inner liberation. 



1. Louis Trenker, bora in Ortisei in 1892, was a movie director, cinematographer, and actor in 
German movies, although he retained his Austrian citizenship. He achieved his greatest 
notoriety in the 1930s starring in mountain-climbing roles. 



41 



I 



Ascending and Descending 



There is no significant upheaval in the world of culture, social phe- 
nomena, and, in general, collective sensibility, that is not capable of 
having a symbolic meaning and of pointing to an order of things that usu- 
ally escapes a superficial observer. 

The world of sports in this regard is far from representing an excep- 
tion. Moreover, we may add that the very phenomenon of the growth 
and importance that sports have enjoyed in contemporary Western life 
is the barometric index of the shift, on the part of the Western soul, to a 
worldview that is very different from that of the previous bourgeois and 
intellectualist nineteenth century. It is superfluous, at this point, to em- 
phasize the relationship between this upheaval and the action-oriented 
new political currents. 

But even in the domain of the various sports, similar considerations 
have to be made. In this context, I wish to confine them to a circumscribed 
topic, namely, to the meaning of the immediate, general popularity that 
skiing has enjoyed, particularly compared to the meaning of another simi- 
lar form of sport, namely, mountain climbing. 

In order to prevent misunderstandings, I must specify the level to which 
my thoughts apply. First of all I would like to make it very clear that I have 
never had, nor will I ever have, anything against the practical value of 
skiing. I will gladly acknowledge everything that may be acquired from 
this sport in terms of health, bravery, physical and mental invigoration, 
and its refreshing effect upon our youth, whom the modern metropolitan 
life suffocates and oppresses. Let this be clear from the start; therefore, 
what I will say later on in no way should induce my readers to think that I 



43 



DocTKinc 

deny such practical value to skiing as a sport. I also wish to add that I 
myself practice skiing as well as mountain climbing — obviously as a mere 
amateur — without being affected by the negative symbolic meaning, very 
revealing of our times, which this sport has come to assume. 

Skiing has enjoyed a rapidly growing popularity considering that, as 
a sport, it is not even sixty years old. The first skiing competition was 
held in 1870 in Christiania, where the villagers of Telemark defeated 
their opponents by employing a special technique, causing a universal 
astonishment. Naturally, skis were previously known in Northern Euro- 
pean countries as means for traveling through snow-covered areas; people 
thought of them as natural and useful tools, just as a boat that is em- 
ployed to cross the waters. However, skiing as a sport that awakens a 
special passion and generates a certain pleasure has acquired a great 
popularity among the great European nations only in very recent times. 
In the aftermath of World War I it has won the hearts of the younger 
generation. Skiing' s rapid success, its universal appeal, the genuine in- 
terest and enthusiasm it induces in both sexes are so characteristic that it 
would be superficial to see in it something merely casual. Rather, it is 
something that ought to be explained as that which precisely typifies the 
contemporary spirit. 

Thus, we should inquire: what constitutes the essence of skiing? What 
is its nucleus, the point around which its other aspects revolve? The an- 
swer is easy: it is the descent. 

Just as in elementary climbing, the fundamental element and the cen- 
ter of interest is ascending, likewise, in skiing this corresponds to descend- 
ing. The dominant motif in mountain climbing is conquest. Once the peak 
is reached and the point beyond which one cannot go any further is at- 
tained, the phase most interesting to an ice or rock climber ends. In skiing, 
the opposite is true: the purpose of every ascent is descending. Hours of 
effort, which are necessary to reach a certain height, are spent only in 
order to be able to slide downhill. Thus, in more developed and modem 
winter resorts, the problem is solved in favor of the true interest of skiers 
through the construction of cables that carry them effortlessly to the top; 
after coming down they are ready to go up again, for as many rides as they 
wish. Just as climbing is characterized by the thrill of the ascent, likewise 



44 



Ascending and Descending 

as a conquest, skiing is characterized by the thrill of the descent, by speed, 
and even by eventual falls. 

This last point is not irrelevant. The relationship between the self and 
one's own body differs greatly between climbing and skiing. In climbing 
we find a direct sense of one's whole body. The forms emphasize equilib- 
rium, elan, and effort, which presuppose mastery over the body — the lucid 
and calculated shift of all its weight in response to each challenge pre- 
sented by the ascent, the grip, the reliability of the step carved in the ice. 
In skiing it is a different story: the relationship of the self and the body, 
which is connected to the skis and put at the mercy of the forces of gravity, 
may truly be compared to the relationship between somebody driving a 
car and the car itself, once it is moving at full speed. Once the skier has 
begun his race downhill, there is only one thing he can do: guide himself, 
using precise movements, by regulating speed and direction, and by de- 
veloping a mastery of those reflexes that control the descent This is like 
the case of a driver who enjoys driving at full speed in a road crowded 
with people and other cars, without slowing down, but acting with quick 
reflexes in order to avoid various obstacles or people, almost playing with 
them, and then moving on to other obstacles. 

As far as the inner aspect of skiing is concerned, namely, concerning 
that which it has to offer to the spirit, it is necessary to remember one's 
impression of putting on skis for the very first time: one has the impression 
that the ground is slipping from underneath one's feet, or of falling. Such 
an impression surfaces again in more difficult forms of this sport, such as 
downhill racing and ski jumping. On this basis I do not think I am wrong to 
say that the deepest meaning of skiing consists of transforming the instinc- 
tive fear of falling, or the instinct of holding back or of stopping— which 
accompanies every fall— into a sensation of exhilaration, of pleasure, which 
makes one wish to go faster and play with speed. Paradoxical as it seems, 
skiing may be defined as the technique, game, and enjoyment of falling. 
In skiing we find a form of boldness, of courage (which for all practical 
purposes should not be despised), and yet it is a special form that is com- 
pletely different from the boldness of a mountain climber and is likewise 
tied to antithetical meanings: it is an essentially modern form of boldness. 
With the term falling, we describe the symbolic meaning of skiing and 



45 



DocTRint I 

the deep reason for its growing popularity. Among the many varieties of 
sports, skiing should definitely be counted among those that least reflect 
classical values. This is why, while the ancient traditions of all people ^^ PART TWO 

symbolically portray the mountain as the goal of ascents and of transfigu- 
rations (this despite almost total ignorance of climbing techniques), there 
is no reference in these traditions to skiing. The fact is that in skiing, the 
modern spirit finds itself essentially at home; this modern spirit is intoxi- 
cated with speed, with constant change, with acceleration. Until recently 
this intoxication was celebrated as the spirit of progress, despite the fact 
that, in many regards, it is nothing other than a collapsing and a falling 
down. This exhilarating motion, joined with a cerebral feeling of control 
over the direction of these forces hurled and no longer really mastered, is 
typical of the modern world, in which the self achieves its most intense 
self-awareness. As if through a reflection, I believe that values similar to 
those of climbing appear in skiing and characterize it in regard to climb- 
ing, as the physical translation of the opposite of ascending, elevating one- 
self, overcoming the forces of gravity. 

Let me repeat that I myself practice skiing, although I am not dis- 
turbed or distracted by these ideas. One should not shun any experience. 
What matters is to maintain openness toward all experiences and thus be 
always aware lest physical and emotional elements attempt to exercise a 
seductive influence upon higher domains. 



Experiences 



46 



8 



The Northern Wall 
of Eastern Lyskamm 



I think my readers will be interested in learning about my climb of the 
Eastern Lyskamm (4532 meters) by the northeastern wall, on August 
29, 1930. It was not the first time this climb had been attempted; in 1890 
the roped party of Norman Neruda, Klucker, and Reinstadler followed the 
rocky path of the mountain for almost the entire ascent The second climb, 
the first ever to be attempted by Italians, was accomplished by Dr. Carlo 
Fortina with the mountain guide Augusto Welf from Gressoney. In 1926 
two Germans climbed it without a guide; in 1927 the German W. Kehl 
climbed it with two guides. On August 26, 1929, the brave Italian female 
climber NinT Pietrasanta, with the mountain guide Chiara from Alagna, 
performed the first all- women climb, thus winning a new record for Italian 
mountaineering. Two young men from Torino, Emanuele Andreis and Luigi 
Bon, during that same August, were the first Italians to climb it without a 
guide. 

However, considering the importance of this mountain, the majesty of 
its northern side, the remarkably lucky circumstances under which our 
climb took place, and the straight path we followed, I wish to publish my 
notes. 

My companion is Eugenio David, from Gressoney, one of the best young 
mountain guides from the Val d' Aosta. Tall, agile, calm, of a steadfastness 
equal to his courage, he is a painter and a musician and had once been a 
member of the elite Mountain Troops (Alpini). He is the best companion for 



49 



CxpcRiEn ccs 

someone like me, who likes to climb the mountain alone or with as few 
people as possible, tackling the mountain at a fast pace, rather than con- 
quering it at a slow and steady pace. 

We set base camp at Capanna Gnifetti (3647 meters). The night had 
been stormy, marked by repeated lightning flashes and gusts of hail and 
snow. Even though everybody tried to discourage us, shortly before dawn, 
brandishing lanterns, we descend onto the glacier. Ignoring the difficul- 
ties, we resolve to achieve our goal and to make as much progress as 
possible. In the early light, the clouds appear to coagulate in the valleys 
below, revealing the bright white fresh snow and a clear sky of marine 
blue color. The peaks look majestic, forming a choirlike ensemble; behind 
them lay our intended objective, Mount Lyskamm. Before we reach Mount 
Lysjoch, the return of icy gusts of wind and of clouds, which arise from the 
southern valleys and envelope the peaks, cause us to stop and reflect on 
our next move. Considering the circumstances, David declares that at- 
tempting to go on is risky business. At first I do not try to persuade him to 
go on; since waiting has made us cold, I propose to him, as a pis aller, to 
cross the two Lyskamms using the ordinary path on which I had walked 
just two days earlier. By the time we reach the first slopes the horizon 
clears up again. My companion finds his original resolve again, following 
my joke about "the Girl Scout's walk" we are about to begin. After he 
replies, "OK, let's go!" we set off at a running pace toward Mount Lysjoch 
and go even farther, ending up at the foot of Mount Grenzgletscher, al- 
most intoxicated by the thought of the adventure we have committed our- 
selves to. 

It is six o'clock a.m. sharp when we reach the bottom of the mountain 
face. There are no more clouds or wind, there is only a bright light that is 
spreading slowly over the sky and the snow. Above our heads the icy 
slopes appear merciless, vertiginous, disconcerting. All around us, moun- 
tain peaks. 

The bottom of the mountain wall is surrounded by a deep, permanent 
crevasse; today its edges are rather treacherous due to the very recent 
snowfall. We carefully circumnavigate it until we find a place to cross 
over. David descends into the crevasse, trusting an area covered with snow 
to hold his weight. He climbs the slope of the crevasse and makes it to the 



50 



The Northern Wall of Eastern Lyskamm 

other side. Quickly, and without hesitating, I follow suit Now it is time to 
begin our climb. 

From the very start the incline is formidable: not less than sixty de- 
grees. The ground, which is covered by clinging fresh snow to which the 
hook and the ice axe on which we lean for support can easily hold, allows 
us a short-lived hope. A little later we are discouraged to learn that the 
ground is covered only by a thin layer of snow that is insufficient to hold 
our weight but also thick enough to prevent our spiked soles from reaching 
the ice underneath and thereby from getting a firm hold. Farther on we 
encounter pure ice with a few areas covered by snow that had frozen over 
the night before. 

We are in the middle of our adventure. We proceed. The rope be- 
comes useless. It is also useless to think about reciprocal holds. We cannot 
plunge the ice axe into the ground, nor can we possibly lean on it, consid- 
ering that the notches of the steps and the firmness of the natural holds are 
insufficient to hold even the lesser weight of the "vertical component" of 
an inclined body. Moreover, not only is it useless to attempt zigzagging to 
reduce the incline, but also dangerous, since to move a foot sideways be- 
tween the almost vertical ice and the other foot, which is resting uncer- 
tainly, is a big risk. We have no other choice but to press onward indepen- 
dent of each other because if one of us fell he would certainly drag the 
other to a sure death. We thrust the ice axes upward with all our strength, 
trying to gain that minimal amount of safety and hold that will allow our 
agility to spare us digging a hole into the ice — this activity is truly chal- 
lenging for our arms. 

The view of the crevasse yawning beneath us, into which we could 
fall as a result of a minor mistake, has disappeared. We are alone in the 
middle of the uncompromising icy slope, left to our resources for better or 
for worse. Beyond the crevasse lies Mount Dufour, an imposing mountain 
marked by black, tough ridges. All around us a nonhuman silence; that 
lightness of the air that makes every perception acute; and these great, 
motionless, calm, and bright realities that make a strange contrast with our 
inner state of tension and our sensation of imminent danger. Just like our 
bodies, our souls too have little or no support. There is nothing varying or 
picturesque about our ascent; as a matter of fact it is as monotonous as a 



51 



€xper I EHCES 

stone or a mountain stream. There is something almost closed, fierce, and 
relentless about it This ascent requires pure strength and a pure, calm, 
and uncompromising will. Slowly but steadily, something arises in us: that 
automatic, almost supernatural state of security, lack of tiredness, and lu- 
cidity that arises at great heights and in the face of mortal danger, after 
one's initial strength and sensations have been depleted. We press on- 
ward, upward, with strong resolve, a strange calm and precision in our 
every move. Higher up, we can see the first rocks of the mountain rib, 
simultaneously close and far away, due to the deceiving perspective of 
the snows. We aim straight for them. 

When we finally reach these rocks, our hands, quite frozen despite the 
heavy gloves, struggle to wrest a hold from the ice. The length of our ice 
axe embarrasses us; a small axe would have done the job. The vertical 
slope does not show any breaks, not even at this level; however, it is easier 
to deal with that than with the wall of ice that we encounter here and there 
in between rocks. We climb at a rapid pace, assaulting the rock, forgoing 
safety measures with the rope because we fear we have taken too much 
time already. All of a sudden, a rock on which I placed my foot, thinking it 
offered a steady hold, gives way; as it falls downward, I follow suit. It is 
almost a miracle that my ice axe stops my fall right away, even before I 
have time to warn David, who is in front of me. This was the only incident. 
Quite frankly, the fact that we did not experience any slides or losses of 
footholds in an adventure such as this one, conducted in the way that we 
did, seems to me to be more than a case of pure luck. 

The mountain ribs are about to end. Our eyes, which very often turn 
upward, instinctively and questioningly, now contemplate a sort of cliff 
with seracs and stalactites touched by the sun light. To our left, fragments 
of ice fall from above every now and then, at frightening speed, barely 
touching the mountain wall, bouncing off, piercing the air with a noise 
resembling that of bullets. We better hurry up. We do not need to engage 
the seracs, since we can turn right and proceed where the cliff is less steep. 

And finally, as we are approaching the top, bathed in sunlight, we 
pause to take a deep breath. Before us, the wall's inclination decreases 
rapidly to forty-five degrees or less. Better yet, it is covered by a layer of 
fresh, packed snow. Above us, the peak! The characteristic tripodlike shape 



52 



The Northern Wall of Eastern Lyskamm 

of the Eastern Lyskamm is still there, clearly visible in the background 
straight ahead. We could not have aimed better at our intended target. 
David, who had studied our route from Mount Dufour, is proud and rightly 
so. We do not stop but press on at a rapid pace. Here and there are more 
slopes and hard ice, which we bypass without hesitation by following the 
contours of dark rocks; these slopes are easier on us than the previous 

ones. 

At 11:30 a.m. we finally make it to the top. Our ascent has taken ex- 
actly five and a half hours; we are not unhappy about it, considering the 
difficult conditions of the mountain wall. 

The daylight has become glorious and shiny. And now, after the ac- 
tion, contemplation ensues. It is time to enjoy the peaks and heights from 
our vantage point: where the view becomes circular and celestial, where 
petty concerns of ordinary people, of the meaningless struggles of the life 
of the plains, disappear, where nothing else exists but the sky and the free 
and powerful forces that reflect the titanic choir of the peaks. "Many meters 
above sea level, but many more above what is human!" wrote F. Nietzsche 
a long time ago. 

Our journey back is uneventful. Since the condition of the snow pre- 
vents us from descending along the southwestern wall, on the right side of 
"the Nose" (as we had planned originally and which my friend David had 
attempted), cross the Lyskamm along its long side, turning to the left, fol- 
lowing the ridge, heading toward Mount Lysjoch. 

Two hours later we reach the mountain refuge, Gnifetti. We had left 
there, for our return, two very different and yet complementary things, a 
bottle of White Horse whiskey and a text of warrior asceticism, the 
Bhagavadgita. 



53 



9 



Notes Concerning 
Psychic Training in the Mountains 



Among the many strange things Alexandra David-Neel wrote about 
^her thirteen-year-long stay on the Tibetan plateaus, on the peaks of 
the Himalayas, and on the Mongolian steppes, one in particular stands out 

She had been traveling for many days through a vast region of desert 
and mountains with her caravan, when, in the distance, she saw a small, 
black, moving dot. At first she thought it was an animal — which would 
have been odd considering the barren surroundings — but a while later she 
identified it as a man. She thought it must be a lost traveler, or the survivor 
of a destroyed caravan. Somebody from her party yelled out to the man. 
The man was getting closer and yet he did not attempt to reply, as if he 
had not noticed the voices or even David-Neel's caravan. They saw that 
he was almost running, taking great rhythmic and elastic steps (David- 
Neel compared the impression she received with that of cinematic slow 
motion), following a straight line, his head straight, staring ahead. He passed 
next to these people without taking notice of them and then went farther 
and farther away, keeping the same rhythm. From the caravan, somebody 
decided to follow him on horseback, until he saw the man climbing a steep 
slope, always following the same direction and retaining the same pace, 
until he disappeared among the cliffs. 

David-Neel also relates that among the many possibilities cultivated 
by a civilization such as the Tibetan, which has focused for thousands of 
years on the study of the psychic dimension rather than on the physical 
dimension of people and things, there is that of inducing special mental 



55 



Expuieiices 

states. During these states it is possible to eliminate tiredness and to travel 
for days and nights without any rest, with little or no food. 

David-Neel also relates that these powers are developed in Tibet 
through special practices that are mostly aimed at obtaining mastery over 
one's breathing and mind. The mind must acquire the capability to de- 
velop an absolute concentration (symbols and formulas are sometimes 
employed to help the mind stay focused during such a forced march). Af- 
ter determining the goal to be achieved and its general direction in rela- 
tion to the starting point, the subject enters into an extraordinary mental 
state, which cannot be characterized as mediumistic or trancelike because, 
rather than subconscious it is superconscious; in other words it is an active 
rather than a passive state. The only similarities with a trance are merely 
superficial, external traits. From that moment on, a person's inner strength 
is concentrated on the goal; in a way, the subject is separated both from 
other beings and from the external world, with the exception of the ground 
that is immediately before him. What sets in is a tireless and quick pace 
that remains unaltered whether on the plain or slope. Something else 
emerges, namely, a supernormal, instinctive, direct sense of orientation. 
Thus, without a break, these strange beings travel to the preestablished 
location, even if it is several days and nights away, almost as if they lived 
outside of time. 

David-Neel' s caravan had encountered one of these travelers in the 
middle of a plateau that was several days away from the closest inhabited 
center. She came to learn of other cases, both through personal experi- 
ence and through word of mouth. The universally recognized seriousness 
of this writer and traveler demands that we believe that these are not 
made up stories or the fruits of her imagination. We have to agree with 
one of Shakespeare's sayings, according to which "There are in heaven 
and earth more things than what is contained in all human philosophy." 

By mentioning this episode in this context, I am certainly not urging people to 
become Tibetan yogis and to devote themselves to practices of extraordinary 
psychic development All things considered, these practices are not really suited 
for the mentality and physical constitution of a modern Western person; on the 
other hand, I do not mention this episode merely out of curiosity. 



56 



Notes Concerning Psychic Training in the Mountains 

The fact is that, in regard to mountain climbing, there exist possibilities 
of inner training which, without being so extraordinary or dramatic as David- 
Neel's story, may lead those who cultivate them further than those who do 
not These possibilities are not inaccessible. We may acknowledge that 
among serious climbers there are some who have developed these possi- 
bilities in a partial fashion, without being aware of it and without employing 
a specific method; indeed, these possibilities developed as the indirect re- 
sult of a purely physical training conducted in special circumstances. 

It is necessary to begin by acknowledging the mechanical character 
of sports training in general, notwithstanding some exceptions in whom it 
is almost always possible to detect the presence of a certain spiritual level. 
In this type of sports training, the relationship of the "self' with the body 
resembles the relationship a person may have with another person or an 
animal he intends to dominate and subject to his will. There is really no 
direct relationship between them; the self commands the body, through 
nerves and muscles, to perform certain movements or to make certain 
efforts. As a result, some reactions (for example, tiredness, pain, and so 
on) ensue; through repetition one attempts to eliminate these reactions 
and to gradually create in the body some automatic habits and dispositions 
that one did not previously have. Once this is accomplished, the body ceases 
to resist and suffer, and it obeys just as with ordinary movements, like a 
tamed animal. Thus, the desired level of training has been achieved. 

However, in order to experience such possibilities, one must recog- 
nize a third element, of an intermediary nature (which is neither psychic 
nor merely corporeal) between the body and the self, which we may call 
vital force, or vital principle. Somehow, such an element has always been 
acknowledged in ancient traditions which, in this regard, had more com- 
plete views on man's nature than those elaborated by modern positivist 
science. This element is the foundation of the body's life; one of the func- 
tions with which it is most directly related is breathing. 

It is possible to achieve a different type of training and control over 
the physical dimension by acting upon this vital force, by making action 
depend on it, instead of acting directly through nerves, muscles, and so on. 
The difficulty is in the fact that the vital force manifests itself on the plane 
of the body's subconscious and thus it cannot be immediately controlled 



57 



tXPERIEIKES 

(with the exception of some special and extraordinary cases — further on I 
will briefly mention the effect of great heights). However, the will can 
easily act upon the breath, and thus, due to the above-mentioned relation- 
ship between breath and vital force, it is possible to achieve the goal. 

These are the premises. On their basis one can join a purely physical 
training with psychic training (or should I say psychophysical) in which 
what acts is not so much a group of muscles, more or less developed, but 
rather a direct spiritual force; thus we shall see that some limitations en- 
countered in the first type of training can be overcome by applying the 
second type. 

In specific regard to mountain climbs (by this term I do not mean acro- 
batic feats or the overcoming of vertical walls, but circumstances in which 
the climb, no matter how tough, always requires a certain continuous pace), 
we can distinguish between a common method and a method I character- 
ize as an attack. 

Considering that the power of the moral-psychic element over the 
physical dimension is sufficiently known, I will not emphasize it in this 
context: through inner resources and feelings of exaltation or enthusiasm, 
even weak and worn out bodies have proven, in countless cases, to be 
able to successfully overcome difficulties and to engage in the most in- 
credible and strenuous efforts (in wartime there have been plenty of in- 
stances of this). Anybody who has practiced climbing may remember what 
a strange influx of new strength has sometimes occurred when, after feel- 
ing literally worn out by a storm and having almost reached a point of 
giving up, all of a sudden the place of and the way to safety are recog- 
nized; or when, after hours spent on the mountain face, feeling exhausted 
and uncertain about the way out, one finally sees the much yearned-for 
peak. 

Psychology has given a name to this phenomenon: it is called the "sec- 
ond wind" (W. James). In this way we must recognize that, aside from the 
vital force, which is usually at work in the limbs and organs related to 
them, there is a deeper and greater reservoir that manifests itself only in 
exceptional circumstances, almost always under the influence of a psy- 
chological or emotional factor. Thus, the task consists of finding a method 
through which to tap into this hidden source of energy, the essence of 



58 



Notes Concerning Psychic Training in the Mountains 

which is, however, experienced instinctively, casually, and emotionally. 

The first way to achieve such a goal is rather intuitive. First of all it is 
necessary to empty one's self and to be willing to exhaust, as quickly as 
possible, the amount of energy available to the body, until a critical level 
of exhaustion is reached. Then, what occurs is the phenomenon of the 
second wind, in which the vital energies in reserve are forced to emerge. 
Since they are not connected to the physical body, they are not limited; 
they can do much more than physical energies. Thus, one enters into a 
new rhythm and state of tirelessness. 

And so, for all practical purposes, one can overthrow the habitual con- 
duct among climbers of trying to avoid exhaustion by proceeding at a slow 
pace, by becoming fatigued as soon as possible, tackling the ascent offen- 
sively, just like those enthusiastic amateurs about whom expert climbers 
say, "In less than twenty minutes we will find them sitting down, breath- 
less, waiting for us." He who knows begins the climb offensively and con- 
tinues in this fashion: it is he who has to wait for others in huts or on tops of 
peaks, sometimes even for hours, without being breathless, better yet, 
without being nearly as tired as others. 

The secret lies for the most part in the breath. It is necessary to get used 
to feeling one's breath, to immediately take control of it from the very first 
step, without ever letting go of it. Second, it is necessary to connect the 
rhythm of breathing to the pace of walking, without ever breaking this con- 
nection: inhale while taking a step, hold the breath in between steps, and 
exhale while making the next step with the other leg, and so forth. Due to 
the different inclines, when the climb is steeper one can regulate the walk- 
ing pace and even slow it down; in the flatter areas one could even acceler- 
ate this pace, without ever breaking, for any reason, the correspondence 
between the rhythm of breathing and the pace of walking. 

This technique has its equivalent in the habit cultivated by experi- 
enced climbers and mountain guides, who retain the same pace without 
ever stopping to catch their breath. The difference is that in the former 
case, this must be done in a conscious and controlled fashion and not in an 
automatic way. The point is to activate a psychic force because the pace 
must be increased and yet that connection with breath must also be main- 
tained. Thus, what occurs after a short time is a condition of weariness that 



59 



EX PERI£R CE5 

would induce most people to break the connection in order to breath more 
frequently or even to stop and to catch one's breath. Once a certain limit is 
reached, an inner act is required in order to go further. Then what sets in is 
a new state in which walking and breathing form a natural unity no longer 
requiring one's supervision; there is no more tiredness and the initial speed 
of the assault is not only maintained effortlessly, almost by some mysteri- 
ous inner push, but it is even increased despite steep inclines. 

I would not talk about this unless I had a personal, though limited, 
experience of it and unless I had not personally verified and repeatedly 
heard from others how, through this method, climbs can be done in half the 
time (or even less) than that usually taken by a mountain guide or by a 
well-trained climber. 

Moreover, I have personally verified the curious phenomenon whereby, 
as soon as I tried to stop for just an instant, a strange force that was almost 
beyond my control immediately urged me onward. The inner act that acti- 
vates the second wave at the precise moment the habitual energies are 
depleted can hardly be described and taught; each person needs to find it 
by himself. However, it can hardly be understood by those who have not 
learned to divide their souls into two parts: one being used for absolute 
commanding, the other for unconditional obeying. 

I wish to add two more brief comments. The first concerns the heart. 
Such training is not recommended for those who suffer from a cardiac 
condition. But those who are healthy will certainly not be harmed by it. 
This is not the context in which to explain at length the reason why; I will 
only say that it is dangerous to one's health to engage in a training of a 
purely physical character, in which one acts almost automatically with- 
out any contact with the inner functions, often subjecting to an overwork 
the limited energies which are available to the organs. Conversely, there 
are fewer dangers when the real support is no longer provided by the 
body but by the spirit, and where mysterious, supernatural, and deep- 
seated energies are evoked, which not even modern parapsychology has 
been able to measure in all their possibilities. This is not, as someone 
may think, an effort destined to have a fatal repercussion, such as the 
collapse of the body at a later time. Those who have really learned to 
master this training do not lament any reaction in that sense: I can testify 



60 



Notes Concerning Psychic Training in the Mountains 

from personal experience, I spent long summer periods in the mountains 
and on glaciers practicing that technique without any negative conse- 
quence to my body or to my nervous system. 

My second observation concerns great heights. Great heights (from 
3500 meters and up) represent a particularly favorable condition for psy- 
chic mountain training. They offer the opportunity for an easier and more 
spontaneous unfolding of the vital force, not without reference to the dif- 
ferent rhythm of the blood circulation, caused by the lighter atmospheric 
pressure. We can even say — from an inner point of view, not that to which 
ordinary medicine is limited — that mountain sickness constitutes a spon- 
taneous emergence of this phenomenon in a person who has only been 
able to experience it in a passive way. 

When this phenomenon is actively assumed and actualized, mountain 
sickness is replaced by a sense of lightness, by lack of tiredness, and al- 
most by an intoxication that does not dull the senses but which bestows 
lucidity, a sense of impulse to action, which is the same that, in psychic 
training, always accompanies in a particularly lively and characteristic 
way every ascent, almost erasing the perception of time. 

I will conclude on this note. 

In the example I presented previously of using breath in climbing, I 
only meant to hint at the limit of certain possibilities. Again, I wish to 
repeat that in no way do I intend to suggest that climbers ought to become 
like fakirs. After all, even in the East, the fakirs, those who are busy pro- 
ducing prodigious feats, are regarded by the higher castes with no more 
respect than we regard illusionists. This is not what I am talking about. 
Even the desire of being able to climb a mountain at a fast pace is a ques- 
tionable thing. 

However, in each of the above-mentioned descriptions, there is an 
inner and an outer aspect; only the first one is essential, the latter is only 
consequential. I have remarked that what I have mentioned in this context 
about technique is often part of the experience of the best climbers, those 
who do not consider climbing to be a mere sport. Those who, in every 
physical ascent, experience a little the sense of an inner elevation; those 
who look at every icy height almost as the symbol of an intangible culmi- 
nation; those who really grasp the message of the vast spaces, where there 



61 



tXPCRIEHCES 

are only heaven and pure, free forces — they will most likely experience 
themselves not as body, but rather as life; they are likely to transform their 
lives with a creative vital tension so much as to achieve the results of the 
technique I describe. 

In contrast, those who do not ascend as if they were carried by the 
body as if by a well-trained beast of burden are guarding the body's life 
forces. They are directly and consciously supporting the body with its in- 
ner energy, and thereby exalting it, energizing it, and bringing it forward 
in a manner that does not need to struggle against the flesh's weariness 
and weight They are the most likely to intimately perceive the ritual mean- 
ing of an ascent, that living meaning of purification and liberation, whereby 
the ancient world (from the Greek Mount Olympus to the Hindu Mount 
Meru) saw in the great heights the symbolic dwelling of superhuman enti- 
ties: what I have described in this chapter is one aspect of what the an- 
cients may have experienced as sacred on a mountain. 



62 



The Ascent of Mount Langkopfel 



How many more hours to the top?" somebody asks. Looking elsewhere, 
almost as if it was not worth it to look at the mountain or at the people, 
the mountain guide answers softly, "Four." 

Four hours is not a long time, and yet, knowing that does not make the 
peak look any friendlier. The mountain, of a uniform gray color, seems to 
rest in a narrow basin of frozen snow and then to mushroom into a number 
of towers and spires that appear to get lost in the distance. Far away lies 
the peak, invisible to the naked eye. A woman who lives in the mountain 
shelter says, almost with contempt in her voice, "A lot of people go up 
there. One evening they brought down somebody who died. Another time 
they brought back a man with a broken leg. They go up there by them- 
selves, and then, almost always, the mountain guide has to go up there and 
bring them back down." 

The woman seems to be talking to herself; she leaves as if none of this 
is her concern. I spontaneously recall the saying, "Men come and go, but 
the mountain remains." I look at the spires bathed by the twilight, seeming 
to ask me a mute question. 

The following morning at seven o'clock I leave the shelter. Dense 
clouds at the horizon dim the light of the rising sun but the sky above is 
free and clean and the mountain is the color of lead. I patiently climb the 
scree; this is a task that requires my concentration because I often lose my 
balance with the frequent slides. I head toward the place where, accord- 
ing to the map, my assault on the mountain face should begin. I have to 
move to the left because the wall before me is totally vertical. Starting 
from the left, I need to assault the rock and then travel diagonally toward 



63 



£x per icn CC5 

a little valley located higher up. I press on. For the first few meters I pro- 
ceed blindly, constantly shifting my four limbs in search of invisible holds. 
When, after going around the first smooth, protruding boulder, I finally 
succeed in finding a foothold, I feel I have reached a great vantage point. 
The rock becomes easier to handle and now I am able to climb it verti- 
cally. Farther ahead there is another succession of diagonal ups and downs 
that leads me to the little valley in the middle. One and a half hours have 
gone by and we are just a few dozen meters from the base, which looks 
very distant despite being directly below me, because in between is the 
very steep wall. 

Here I am, on the narrow depression spotted with snow, but we still 
need to reach the real base of Mount Langkopfel. An icy canal to the left, 
between the vertiginous mountain walls, seems to be the only possible 
way. Luckily I have an ice axe with me; it takes strength to carve niches, 
so I engage in short runs, at the risk of losing balance, in order to gain 
space and save energy. However, the more I climb the more the ice canal 
seems to grow longer. Having finally succeeded in reaching another sec- 
tion of pure rock, a new sight unfolds before my eyes: a series of boulders, 
corners, towers, and pinnacles criss-crossing on top of each other. Every 
pinnacle seems a goal, every boulder a way. After a brief rest we move on 
(once again I experience the strange feeling from the depths of my being 
of an almost automatic impulse urging me on), relying on our arms' strength, 
from rock to rock. The rocky perspective becomes wider and more com- 
plex as I ascend. When I think I have finally arrived at the top, there is yet 
another boulder to climb. The towers begin to look thinner, grouped to- 
gether, far away. Now, as I follow a hypothetical route, they group to- 
gether on the side, becoming an airy and evanescent thing resting in the 
sky. Suddenly, I emerge on the crest. 

The wind is raging, the horizon is round. Beneath me the valley is 
covered by clouds: only the peaks and the glaciers, suspended in the sky, 
are clearly visible. Mount Langkopfel is still before me as a tangle of 
vertical peaks. What should I do? I descend a little, on the opposite side of 
the line of the crest. Following providential scratch marks of spiked shoes 
along a twisted rock face made easy to climb by many rocks on the ground, 
I suddenly ascend again. The grips multiply, the mountain walls become 



64 



The Ascent of Mount Langkopfel 

lower. I feel an influx of new strength and the fervor of conquest. Here I 
am, alone on top of the last rock. There is nothing else around me. The 
wind is raging, but the open sky is engulfing me. 

When I look down again at the valley below, the view is far from 
promising. The clouds have reached my position and from the bottom va- 
pors are rising very fast, one wave after another. I look at my watch. By 
God! Seven hours have gone by. It is time to go back. 

I travel again on the ledge, but during the descent the rocks become 
increasingly steep and the grips less reliable. From the vaporous and phan- 
tasmagoric appearance of the rock forms and pinnacles that by now have 
been reached by the fog, I move into a colorless, dim, and treacherously 
humid atmosphere that hides everything from sight. I proceed slowly, but 
to no avail; there is a chance I may get lost. I put on my snow jacket and 
eat something; crouching in a ravine, I wait. 

It is hardly a pleasant surprise when I realize it is already six o'clock 
p.m. when I finally manage to enter the ice canal after a difficult passage. 
Ironically, the air clears up just as the sun begins to set behind the high 
peaks! Without wasting a second I slide down the ice, digging the ice axe 
into it with all my strength in order to slow my descent; with the same 
speed I enter the small valley. I cannot find the road, however. The rock is 
slippery because of the humidity and every move requires careful exami- 
nation, attention, and patience. Finally I see the spots of snow. Good. I 
move on. But where the descent begins I can no longer see anything and I 
can barely orient myself. I am uncertain about the way back. A new state 
of mind sets in: anxiety and boredom. 

After a few meters I realize I have made a mistake. I must go up 
again. On the right side it seems better. I move on, yet I wonder where I 
am going to end up. There is only a little light on the peaks and down 
below I cannot distinguish anything clearly. The rock has become a uni- 
form, ice cold, indifferent mass. At this point it doesn't seem to matter if I 
go in this or that direction; I have the feeling of going toward the void, as 
if with every step I am about to fall and be hurled into it. The fingers 
instinctively and nervously clasp the holds; the feet are unsteady, tired of 
the same position, and try to reach out to the void, but when they do not 
feel anything but the flat mountain wall, they return to the spot they were 



65 



CxpcRiEnccs 

occupying. I need to find a way out, but I do not seem to have many choices. 

It is not possible to stop here. I could find again the small valley and 
spend the night there but finding it again is easier said than done because 
of the total darkness. I cannot find my way back with just my hands; I do 
not know what is awaiting me even if I were to overcome this or that 
immediate obstacle. I must keep my cool, control my nerves, and main- 
tain my intense concentration. I have to make it down, one way or an- 
other. And so I begin this incredible descent into the darkness and the 
void, trusting only the nimbleness of my limbs, crawling very slowly along 
the mountain wall, with a heightened sense of touch and of awareness. 
My foot keeps searching and sliding downward while holding the body in 
balance, no matter how unstable, until it stops and takes a risk; it is an 
adventure to let go with the hand without knowing whether the body will 
hold. I am greatly relieved each time I feel a new hold and I am able to 
restore my balance. My body has become one thing with the rock, and it is 
animated by an instinctive dexterity and by an unexpected and supernor- 
mal lucidity. The experience of not knowing where I am is continuous — 
the darkness has become something permanent, material, dense, into which 
I seem to constantly move. 

All of a sudden, I think I see a flash. Can it be? Yes! It is a light 
oscillating and coming toward me. I can hear somebody shouting in my 
direction. I answer with a voice that hardly sounds like my own. The light 
approaches rapidly, almost leaping; how can it be, even if the guide were 
running? And yet, after only a few minutes, I can make out the contour of 
Franz Broschek's face in the darkness. He yells to me, 'This way! You 
have made it!" With a jump the Austrian guide climbs up to me and offers 
me the end of a rope. "Tie this around you. We are on the scree. I didn't 
think I would be able to find you. Let's go now." 

Now I realize there is a second light on the rock. It is carried by the 
Italian mountain guide Carlo De Netz. "Where the hell are you going?" I 
ask them. "Do you think that the two of us came all the way up here just to 
pick up a nut like you?" says De Netz. "We need to find six more people 
who are about to spend the night on the glacier, for God's sake!" 

A little later my feet touch the ground after sixteen hours of adven- 
ture. High up the two lights continue their march along the great dark 



66 



The Ascent of Mount Langkopfel 

silhouette of Mount Langkopfel, which solemnly emerges against the back- 
ground of a starry sky. Down below, the lights of the refuge yield the 
promise of a well-deserved dinner and a nice bed. 



67 



Ice and the Spirit 



Oirtler. Last night was a stormy one. At dawn, looking out from the 
mountain shelter Payer, gaps of blue sky, visible through waves of 
rapidly moving clouds, gave us hope. We take off toward the glacier in 
order to reach the highest peak of the Order massif. On top of Mount 
Tabaretta (where we found a skeletal signpost and the remains of a hut 
crushed under the weight of ice), the fog, the wind, and the storm are back. 
We go ahead despite all because there are other groups nearby that are 
accompanied by guides who, thanks to quick sightings of crevices and 
seracs, are able to orientate themselves and find the right direction in this 
white mass in which the sky and the snow are fused together. 

And so we continue slowly but steadily, at times pausing when the vio- 
lence of the wind threatens to blow us away and to take our breath away. 
We wear heavy clothes, big gloves, and ski masks, which, after being hit by 
thousands of whirling particles, have almost become stiff crusts of ice. We 
proceed at a tired pace through the fresh snow in which our legs sink up to 
our thighs, struggling to find a solid foothold on the steeper slopes. 

Finally we see the top — or what must be the top; not only can we 
barely see in this weather, but every part of the glacier looks like every 
other. Our tracks in the snow have already disappeared, a few minutes 
were enough for the storm to erase them. Even the three guides in the 
other parties cannot find their way; we can barely make out their silhou- 
ettes as they test the ground here and there with their ice axes trying to 
avoid falling into a hidden crevice. 

But suddenly, a transformation occurs — a view that can never be for- 
gotten or described with words. After a strong gust of wind a clarity is 



69 



CXPCRICnCE5 

manifested all around; although it still does not reveal the sky or the ground, 
it creates an ethereal and immaterial atmosphere. This milieu is pervaded 
by silent waves of light, resembling breaths or shivers, as if it were a living 
organism. The shapes of the members of the other groups look as if they 
are suspended in air, shadowless, weightless. It looks as if a memory from 
the Greek past has come alive and is appearing to us: as in the ancient 
myth, ethereal bodies (pneusomata) are wandering through fields of light 
on the immaterial lands of the blessed and the heroes. 

That view lasts only a few seconds. After that, more fog and wind 
gusts follow. Finally we return to the earth, to the solid and infernal ele- 
ments, to the things made of corruptible hardness and to forms subject to 
birth and decay under the monotonous daily light. 



Weiss-KugeL To those who are familiar with glaciers, the ascent of Mount 
Weiss-Kugel (3860 meters) is, in itself, no great feat. From a tiny Italian 
mountain refuge built on the last rocks before the ice, we proceed onto the 
glacier in a long, patient detour that enables us to avoid areas marked by 
huge crevasses. We reach a pass; beyond it lies the road leading straight 
to the peak. This road winds up a steep slope that is technically easy to 
climb due to the favorable condition of the snow, which allows a firm hold 
for iron soles as well as hooks and snow axes. 

However, a new experience is the descent along the Austrian side, 
which has occurred in an adventurous way, since in this white desert the 
information gathered from our maps is not really helpful; gusts of fog hide 
the peaks from our sight, depriving us of a valuable reference point. 

After hours of ascending in a northern direction, we thought we would 
find solid ground and a new path behind a group of rocks. What we find 
instead is a sea of ice, a huge solidified current of ice, almost flat, not 
white but gray — an almost-shiny, leadlike gray — laying between two banks 
of boulders and sand, at times black, at other times a red color. All around 
is a dead silence, a desertlike solitude, a total absence of any form of life, 
of colors. 

Often the mind derives instinctively an indefinite meaning from words 
that is connected to mysterious analogies. The words that come to my 
mind in this place are: "the valley of damnation." I do not know why. This 



70 



CE AND THE S P I R IT 



area seems to be stricken with some curse or with something that cannot 
be removed for all eternity. It is as if these rocks were broken by lightning, 
hurled down from high peaks, to finally lie down as tragic, gloomy, hope- 
less shapes. It is as if this enormous stream of ice were once alive and had 
now become a gray, nameless, and monotonous mass, or a brightness bur- 
ied in a leadlike solidity. 

These confused analogies applied to yet another element: endless- 
ness, eternity. We have been walking for several miles on the gloomy ice, 
hoping to see an end in sight; however, the same scenario continues be- 
fore us, always the same, discouraging, without variations. We walk in the 
same landscape between two cursed banks of rocks. We have been walk- 
ing and climbing for about ten hours since we left the shelter. By now the 
backpacks are "killing" our shoulders and our strength is dissipating. Yet 
we can only press onward through this "valley of damnation," automati- 
cally, without any hope for inner or outer support before evening comes. 

Around sunset we are half-delirious with exhaustion, but the gray ice 
finally ends, generating a great current of yellowish and turbulent water 
that seeks a way through the endless rocks and morainic debris. We fol- 
low this river and finally, higher up on the rocks, we see the first and only 
sign of human presence: a linear building, somewhere between a Bavar- 
ian and a modern style, the color of white bones or bared nerves. Through 
an absurd mental association, it reminds me of an 1845 tale by E. A. Poe, 
The Fall of the House of Usher, about an accursed mansion. This building 
turns out to be the Hochjoch-Hospiz, the first Austrian mountain shelter, 
an excellent resting place staffed by cordial people and endowed with 
good food. The experience of the 'Valley of damnation" slowly descends 
into my subconscious. 

Oberwalder-Hiitte (Gross-Glockner). The evening descends calmly upon 
the glacier and the islandlike rock on which the shelter lies. From inside 
come echoes of songs and reflections of light; I venture alone beyond 
the rock, on the snows, following a track, in the direction of Mount 
Weisbach-horn. 

In this environment, a soul open to new experiences is likely to feel 
an inexpressible nostalgia and a deep yearning for the indefinite and the 



71 



EXPHIERCE) 

formless. This scene is a new type of desert and a new face of silence. 
Behind me the evening vapors emerging from the valleys below allow 
only the sight of the icy peaks. These peaks, illumined by the last reflec- 
tions, stand tall and majestic; they are the only things in the sky that still 
hold on to the light, looking disembodied, simultaneously close and far 
away, like memories, like silent apparitions. Ahead of me lies a gray- 
green color resembling seawater, in which the sky and the snow are 
barely distinguishable. The barely visible path leading to the top is the 
only rhythm; it is like the trace of the desert on one's soul, a blessed and 
painful solitude. 

I yearn to keep walking. Everything is far away, healed, forgotten. 
The blessed night descends upon me. I experience the simplification of 
my soul and of all things. 

And finally, the first stars begin to blossom in the sky above me. 



72 



12. 



The Valley of the Wind 



After much huffing and puffing, whistling and screeching along the 
wsteep slopes, looking as if it could not have made one more meter, 
no matter what the cost, the miniature train from Merano finally arrives 
amidst a glorious white cloud of steam at Malles, the last stop on the 
itinerary. We get off the train and my first sensation once outside the 
heated compartment is like being suddenly plunged into ice-cold water. 
The air is extremely dry and frigid. All around there are great mountains 
covered by snow. Down in the valleys, great dense masses of trees, some 
red-green, others — those farthest away — of a dark metallic color, al- 
most deep blue. The peak of Mount Ortler emerges far away in the back- 
ground; it appears to be more celestial and brighter than ice, almost of a 
more precious quality. 

The train station (if we may call this tiny Swiss kiosk a station) is 
almost deserted. The few travelers quickly disperse. The town looks de- 
serted as well, except that the chimneys send puffs of smoke into the livid 
afternoon sky. Gigantic pictures and sayings in Gothic letters on billboards 
in the main square remind us of a stage after the show is over. We stop a 
hooded person who has just come out of the Unicorn Hotel: "Me wcit bis 
Reschen?" "Dreiguten Stunden, " he replies. We need a "good three hours" 
to arrive at our intended destination, the lakes of Resia. It is two o'clock in 
the afternoon. It is a waste of time to wait for tomorrow's bus. We decide 
to go on foot and to drink a well-deserved cup of tea when we arrive. We 
follow a small road that starts at the last houses of the town and soon 
merges into a large road that connects the Resia Valley to Austria. As 
soon as we are in the open country, no longer sheltered by the lateral 



73 



Cxpericiices 

mountains above Malles, we are suddenly confronted by an unexpectedly 
strong wind, the likes of which is experienced only in the very high peaks 
on the Swiss borders. Usually winds blow in gusts, and with variations, 
pauses, accelerations, and restarts; what we experience is nothing like 
that. Imagine the continuous, immutable, constant stream of air produced 
by a fan. Then if you multiply its intensity as much as possible and think of 
it as cruelly and painfully icy-cold, you will have an abstract idea of what 
we are feeling. The valley of Resia is a pass totally open on its northern 
side. No significant chain of mountains protects it farther up. The atmo- 
spheric currents of the North, that might begin as far away as the Baltic 
Sea, can rush in very swiftly. Amazingly, this mighty air mass rushing into 
the valley is silent; there are no howls or whistles of wind because there is 
nothing against which the wind breaks out there in the middle of the fro- 
zen black ground under the big white sky. There are no traces of vegeta- 
tion, no houses — only a harshness and a metallic definition of lines in the 
very dry air. There is no water, only very white ice canals. 

"A good three hours to Resia." I do not know exactly how many hours 
it takes. It is not exaggerating to say that we struggle every inch of the way 
against this unbelievable northern wind that crushes your chest, cuts your 
breath, burns your eyes, and tries in every way to tear off your coat. We 
have been in storms when climbing high peaks, but this is an altogether 
different experience; we are walking on flat ground, without a storm, with- 
out being engaged in any real action, with little or no visibility due to the 
wild wind, in the middle of a static landscape that is desolate and charac- 
terized by the absence of anything human. The insolent and paradoxical 
aspects of this situation keeps us from turning around. But in order to reach 
our goal we need true concentration, a tenacity consisting not of physical 
strength but of method, automatism, insensibility, and unshakability: it is a 
real test. All things considered it is not any different from a march in the 
desert, under an unforgiving sun, when nothing else is left in one's mind 
except the unbending will that keeps one going in an automatic way. Resia, 
bathed in the sunset, looks like an abandoned town on the eve of a great 
cataclysm, or like a town evacuated under the threat of a mysterious 
scourge. There are no signs of life; it is truly a desolate sight. Once in a 
while, gusts of snow and pieces of ice fly from the roofs of the houses into 



74 



The Valley of the Wind 

the sky. We proceed with almost an attitude of a military patrol scouting 
an area. Suddenly we see the main group of houses and the church; farther 
ahead we see lighted windows under a hotel sign. 

We see a short staircase outside the hotel and a massive door made of 
black wood; finally we are inside a Nibelungen-like environment, charac- 
terized by a warm mist made up of tobacco and stove smoke and alcohol. 
It is difficult to tell the size of the room; it is crowded with people talking, 
whispering, playing, drinking. The scene looks like a fantastic crowd of 
shadows either suspended or anchored in the smoky mist marked by lights, 
slow bluish spires, saturated with all kinds of smells; it is warm and alive, 

like an animal. 

In the Valley of Wind people live barricaded inside during this part of 

the year. 

What else should I remember about this excursion on Italy's borders? 
Winter forests, skiing, the great white panoramas we viewed from the 
peaks, the harshness of twelve degrees below zero Celsius under the shin- 
ing morning sun. And yet none of these things were anything special. 

Rather, I remember the experience of the lake of Resia at night. Be- 
lieve it or not, we built a small nightclub there. In a house that looked like 
a cloister, built by noble French refugees at the end of the 1700s, one of us 
found a gramophone, and lo and behold, the jazz records of Wunder-Bar. 
Thus, the problem of what to do at night was resolved. 

Somebody lights a big fire. Instead of drinking wine we drink rum and 
kirsch. We dance, and when we are drunk we begin to discuss things. 
Then we go out for a walk in the minus twenty-two degree night. 

Somebody comes up with the idea of going to the lake. It is the middle 
of the night. Try to imagine an immense sheet of black crystal, as levi- 
gated as a mirror, extending for miles: that is what the frozen lake looks 
like. The snowy peaks on the two sides of the valley and the incredibly 
starry sky are reflected in this sheet with a magnetic neatness; this makes 
us think we are caught between a double mirage or a double transparency. 
Try to imagine, if possible, what it must be like to proceed toward the 
middle of the lake without skates, attacked by the northern wind, and in a 
physical and spiritual state of lucid intoxication in which alcohol, nature, 



75 



CXPCRI CRCE5 

and inner exaltation all play a role. However, it is not possible for those 
who have not experienced it to know what the breaking of the underwater 
ice is all about. 

During the night, due to the rapidly falling temperature, it happens 
that the deep layers of ice that are immersed in the waters of the lake 
break up. When that occurs, one can hear a roar and a loud noise reverber- 
ating frightfully across the entire icy crust of the lake, transmitted through 
the valley by a powerful echo. This does not really pose any danger, since 
these fractures do not reach the surface. However, to feel all of a sudden 
under one's feet a roar that grows into a loud booming noise, which is then 
echoed by the mountain, is almost like hearing the voice of the earth itself. 
It feels like an abyss is going to open up under one's feet. This is truly a 
very frightening experience that chills one's blood the way an earthquake 
does. It sparks the awakening of a primordial, marvelous, and frightening 
sensation that is dormant in very archaic recesses of our nature. The de- 
tails of that night are embedded forever in my memory: the incredible 
cold; the wonderful starry night; the reflective, shimmering snow all around 
us; the feeling of excitement mixed with lucid tension; a perfect mental 
equilibrium; and the dreadfully primitive feeling that arises from the depth 
of the lake in the absolute silence of the valley. In these circumstances 
one can understand how it is possible, without any rhetorical exaggera- 
tion, to talk about such a moment as one that transcends ordinary life. The 
Valley of the Wind and the night spent on the frozen lake will remain in 
my memory forever. 



76 



13 



The Ascent of Mount Gross-Glockner 



The psychological motivation leading us to climb the highest 
Austrian peak, the Gross-Glockner (3798 meters), by the most diffi- 
cult route (the Pallavicini-Weg) was twofold. 

First, my group was driven to this expedition by an inner impulse to 
be different from everybody else, which regularly awakens in us every 
time we visit the highest Austrian or German mountains. During the sum- 
mertime these peaks become more or less rallying points for all kinds of 
people who follow the ordinary route. For my part, I must admit to being 
behind the times and the contemporary ideals; personally, I still uphold 
and defend an aristocratic view of the mountain as the domain of a privi- 
leged few. I believe that mountain climbing is more an ascetic exercise 
and a path to spiritual liberation than a democratic sport available to the 
multitudes. However, in this context I do not intend to argue about prin- 
ciples. If we admit that it is a good and socially useful thing for people of 
all social classes, ages, and genders to travel from the city to nature and 
to experience in a natural way feats that were usually performed accord- 
ing to a different meaning, then it is safe to assume that German people 
are ahead of all other European nations. Leaving aside any evaluation of 
this phenomenon, I just wish to explain the reason why we rejected out- 
right the idea of ascending the mountain by the ordinary route (starting 
from Mount Adlersruhe-Hutte and crossing over Mount Klein-Glockner). 
We thought that the only thing this route lacked was a policeman to di- 
rect traffic along a path that had become a sort of perpendicular trench 
with the passing of time. 

Thus, our first motivation, which set in almost as a natural reaction, 



77 



£XPERIEnCC5 

was the desire to be as little "in good company" as possible and to conquer 
Mount Gross-Glockner by a new route that still retained the elements of 
isolation, challenge, and risk. This is where our second motivation came 
into play. 

By flipping through the pages of the most famous and often-quoted 
guide of this mountainous region, we found the description of the Pallavicini 
route was written in almost alarming terms. First of all, it was graded as a 
sixth degree of difficulty and it was said to be ausserst schwierige und 
gefahrvoUe (namely, extremely difficult and fraught with dangers). Sec- 
ond, it was only attempted twice, once in 1889 and again in 1923. The 
guide estimated the duration of the climb to be between ten and twelve 
hours; this meant that one could possibly get caught at nightfall in the 
middle of the vertical icy wall if there were a delay caused by unfavorable 
atmospheric circumstances. Third, to complete this alluring scenario, the 
guide warned readers that it would be necessary to carve in the ice no less 
than twenty-five hundred steps! 

Although at that time we did not know that this information was mis- 
leading, we thought that these facts were intimidating enough to keep 
away ordinary tourists who crowd the regular route and also to confer an 
aura of apprehension on a very challenging ascent. For our part, we did 
not take these warnings seriously, both because we knew the tendency of 
guides— especially German ones— to exaggerate, and also because in an 
ascent on pure ice the difficulties are always relative to the conditions of 
that particular time. In this last regard we could refer to the personal and 
specific experience of the ascent of the northern wall of the Eastern 
Lyskamm (located on Mount Rosa's massif) , which was extremely simi- 
lar to that of the Pallavicini- Weg and was also regarded as extremely 
difficult. 

When we reached the massif of the Gross-Glockner the weather 
conditions could not have been better. It had snowed for almost a week 
above 2500 meters and beautiful sunny days had ensued. Our expecta- 
tions were that, no matter how steep the mountain face was, we were 
not going to be confronted by either ice or a layer of soft and inconsistent 
snow covering ice (the worst possible scenario), but rather by snow that 
had frozen over the ice. We were hopeful that this snow would not be 



78 



THt ASCCHT OF MOUHT G ROSS- G LOCKHER 

too hard. If it were, we would be forced to ascend by carving one step at 
a time. If it were too soft, it would not be firm enough to support our 
weight. On August 19, 1934, we began the ascent, which, in terms of the 
difficulty and amount of time required, turned out to be not as difficult as 
the guide had described it to be. 

The ascent was attempted in a roped party consisting of three people: 
an Italian gentleman, Carlo Rossi di Lauriano; a British citizen, Sir Edwin 
Grant Duff; and myself. The day before, we traveled to the Oberwalderhutte 
to observe a small mountain refuge that was anchored on a black rock 
jutting, like an island out of the icy Gross-Glockner massif. From there I 
drew a sketch of the mountain and studied the route we were going to 
follow with the help of a pair of powerful binoculars that we found in the 
refuge. 

Before we began our assault on the mountain face, we unfortunately 
had to waste a lot of time in order to get there. We traveled across a sea of 
ice that lay before the mountain and then across the Pasterzengletscher, a 
crevasse glacier riddled with seracs. On one hand, wasting too much time 
on this preliminary part causes one to be on the mountain wall just when 
the sun begins to melt the snow, making it treacherous. On the other hand, 
while crossing the so-called sea of ice can easily be done in the dark, by 
leaving from the Oberwalderhutte, or from the closer Hoffinannshutte 
(which is what we did), the same cannot be said about the part immedi- 
ately under the mountain wall, especially in the above-mentioned circum- 
stances. This is because the abundant snowfall poses a constant threat by 
barely covering crevices and precipices; one definitely needs at least a 
minimum amount of light in order to proceed with a certain degree of 
safety and without having to test the snow every step of the way. 

We head toward the right where some rocks overlooking the sea of 
ice and a hill of compact snow prove to be helpful to us. Then we proceed 
longitudinally, moving almost parallel to the crevasse surrounding the 
Glockner massif. We finally reach a point where, at the beginning of the 
Pallavicini- Weg route, the crevasse is broken up because of avalanches. 

As far as the technical aspect is concerned, there is not much to be 
said about this ascent, as is the case with almost all climbs on ice as op- 
posed to those on rocks. 



79 



txptRicnctJ 



We find the first part after the crevasse to be in excellent condition; it 
presents no serious challenge, thanks to the snow that has fallen from above 
and piled up. As we proceed, the slope becomes very steep (sixty-five 
percent, according to the guide we consulted); the ascent would require a 
lot of time if we faithfully follow all of the required safety measures. For 
our part, happy as we are not to have found the much-feared type of ice, 
we begin our climb by assaulting the mountain, that is, by taking fast steps 
supported rather riskily by the ice axes we dig in upward. We do this until, 
having exhausted our agility and energy for these short races, we begin to 
dig firm holds with our axes in order to be able to stand up and keep our 
balance — or at least, leaning against the ice, to pause for a few seconds in 
order to catch our breath for the next little run. This method allows us to 
save a significant amount of time. On one hand, it is riskier than proceed- 
ing at a regular pace (in which one adopts reciprocal safety measures), but 
psychologically speaking it has the merit of retaining a tension and a spirit 
of conquest, the influence of which on our nerves and physical faculties is 
far from negligible. 

The time comes when to proceed in this fashion is no longer possible 
without being very reckless, since the mountain wall becomes increas- 
ingly smooth. Having exhausted our energies in a single advance, we risk 
lacking the strength to carve a resting place, considering that the ice by 
now cannot be cut into with only the ice axe. The sun, whose rise in the sky 
almost accompanies our ascent on the mountain face, gives us some help, 
up to a certain point, by softening the outer surface of the ice. We try to 
move more to the left, toward the rocks, in order to find again the favor- 
able conditions of the snow. Unfortunately, beyond a certain point, we 
find exactly the opposite: fresh snow that has not frozen over and that, 
considering the incline, threatens to slide and drag us along toward the 
valley below. Thus, after two or three zigzags, we head back to the middle 
duct. This is the most difficult and dangerous part of the ascent; at the 
same time, this is the part that left indelible impressions on our souls. 

By being suspended in the middle of the wall without any chance of 
escape — held between light and blinding ice away from any diversion or 
elan; forced into an iron lucidity, an absolute control of all the psychologi- 
cal and physical factors required to create a balance that any unforeseen 



80 



The Ascent of Mount Gross-Glockner 

element could easily jeopardize — we find the spiritual aspect of the expe- 
rience of climbing, carried to the extreme. To feel alone in a free, merci- 
less world with only one's strength to rely on; engaged in an intimate 
dialogue with the deepest and most mysterious forces of one's being; awak- 
ened to a pure, harsh dimension that almost enables us to partake of that 
same transcendence over and indifference toward the human domain that 
in the majestic and shining peaks seem to find their best symbolic 
representation. 

In conditions such as these ascending on ice may be a better experi- 
ence than climbing rocks. In this kind of experience, aside from the above- 
mentioned inner sensations, one has yet another peculiar sensation — that 
of destiny or some kind of love of fate. The rock always presents an obvi- 
ous face: it is solid, always the same. In order to conquer it, what is needed 
is strength, agility, and the ability to choose and use the right holds, which 
can very rarely be tested beforehand. In contrast, ice can give way at any 
time. Then it is impossible not to incorporate as a living element in one's 
thoughts the idea of surrendering oneself to destiny, becoming one with 
one's unknown destiny, considering that one does not take hundreds, but 
thousands of steps in the steep wall of ice, which could slide or give way 
for the slightest reason. If centimeters or even millimeters of ice give way, 
that is enough to cause the foot to slide and the unfortunate climber to be 
hurled into the abyss. 

In this kind of ascent, it is not possible to climb step by step and to gain 
a firm foothold (and not just the front part of one's axe), without taking an 
exaggerated amount of time. Nonetheless, the sense of security that is 
manifested, accompanied by an extraordinary lucidity of thought and 
movement, has an almost superhuman quality. If, in regard to any help 
from the outside, ascents such as these leave us alone with ourselves, at 
the same time, in regard to the inner dimension, they connect us with some- 
thing that is greater than ourselves. This is an action that is connected in a 
deep and transfiguring way with destiny, understood as a higher law that 
prearranges in an opportune manner the relationships of the mysterious 
powers of things with those of all living beings. We could almost say that 
these meanings, as they arise from the experience of ice and of high moun- 
tains, find an unconscious and silent expression in the image of the great 



81 



UPtRIEflCtJ 

cross that is planted on the peak of Mount Gross-Glockner: it is immov- 
able, made of iron bars, encrusted with ice, almost the comprehensive 
symbol of a cosmic hardness, of sacrificial dedication, of destiny and of 
transfiguration. 

At one point the ascension changes pace. Because of the particularly 
hot midday sun we cannot continue to approach the center of the ice canal 
without serious danger. Fragments of ice and rock begin to fall from above, 
piercing the air like bullets; moreover, there are small snow slides that 
might precede bigger ones capable of dragging us downward. After some 
zigzagging we decide to move toward the left, toward the line of the so- 
called Nord-Grat, a ridge of black rocks. 

Here we encounter the same problem, that is, areas of very smooth, 
hard ice, close to the rocks, but with the advantage of reliable hold offered 
once in a while by the rock itself. This ridge leads us directly to the Obere 
Glocknerscharte, a small saddle that can be seen between the two highest 
peaks. The Pallavicini route ends here, merging with the ordinary path in 
a crest of ice one foot wide, with the abyss yawning to the right and left, 
and yet bearing very deep and reliable traces created by the continuous 
passage of people. After this crest we rapidly reach the peak by climbing 
some slabs of rock on which have been secured metallic cords and stakes. 
On the peak we find the usual crowd found in mountain refuges: people 
equipped with guides, ropes, cameras, and binoculars. The latter are help- 
ful in detecting the traces we left on the snow along the incredible path we 
followed all the way up here. 

After leaving Hoffmannschiitte at four a.m., we finally made it to the 
top at four p.m. However, we spent a good part of that time descending 
from that refuge to the level of the sea of ice and then crossing the glacier 
up to the last crevasse. Considering the conditions we faced, I do not think 
that the label "extremely difficult" applied to this ascent is correct, even 
though it is indeed dangerous and steep. To carve steps in the ice is really 
necessary only in some parts, provided the climber is endowed with agil- 
ity, courage, and the capability to measure his moves, and also provided 
that on this basis one does not intend to turn the ascension into an extenu- 
ating work in order to have a maximum amount of safety. Again, safety on 
this kind of mountain face, exposed to the elements from start to finish, is 
always a relative thing. 



82 



It. 



Meditations on the Peaks 



M^ount Blanc, July. We ascend for several long hours from the 
darkness of the valley to the light of the peaks. We travel from 
the dark and dense Nibelungen-like fir woods pervaded by a thick fog, 
through the higher region covered with rocks and desolate moraines. 
Finally at dawn we reach the edge of the lower glacier. From afar, this 
area, as its name (Mer de Glace) suggests, resembles an immense 
body of water that has frozen over and turned into a flat and uniform 
mass. From up close, being continuously crossed with crevices and 
seracs, it resembles a tumultuous criss-crossing of bluish-white and 
grayish-white waves, the dynamics of which have been magically 
halted and solidified. We pass this strange white sea, out of which 
emerge peaks and dark ridges of broken rocks resembling fjords, leav- 
ing behind the last fog that still covers the valleys. We go over bridges, 
abysses of ice, and up mountain walls, working with our ice axes, us- 
ing ropes and crampons, while a bright radiant light starts to spread all 
around us. We walk over some brief, steep walls of rock and then over 
some icy curves. Finally we reach the peak. 

We are standing at the border. Around us, a circular horizon: a sea 
composed of many successive mountain chains, now rocky, now icy, which 
due to their variant qualities and to the different distances, assume every 
gradation of color until they become lost in the distant horizon, melting 
away and giving the sense of the infinite. Immaterial as apparitions, the 
forms of yet more peaks emerge very far away as if they were floating in 
a pearly atmosphere. It is the time of solar heights and of great solitude. 

After these long hours, during which our tenacious will overcame 



83 



EXPCRIEBCEi 

fatigue, inertia, and the subconscious fears of the body, the memory of 
every concern and activity of the life of the plains fades away like an 
echo. Moreover, a different sense of self sets in and it becomes increas- 
ingly difficult to identify oneself with that hard, closed, and ephemeral 
shell, which for most people is the empirical "ego." However, this expe- 
rience is not a mystic shipwreck or a sentimental sense of abandonment. 
Even lyricism is something that finds its proper place in literary circles 
rather than up here. 

Here, where there is only the sky and pure, free forces, the soul par- 
ticipates in an analogous purity and freedom, and in this way one begins to 
understand what the spirit truly is. The soul perceives all this, and before 
the calm and triumphant greatness, all sentimentalism, utilitarianism, and 
human rhetoric disappear. Here, that which in the world of the soul has the 
character of purity, impersonality, and power finds its equivalent in icy 
heights, deserts, steppes, and oceans. We experience the breath of every- 
thing that is wide as an inner force of liberation. 

It is up here on these peaks, beyond which lies another country— and 
from similar experiences— that one can truly perceive the secret of that 
which is imperium in the highest sense of the word. A true imperial tradi- 
tion is not forged through particular interests, through a narrow-minded 
hegemony, or through "sacred selfishness"; such a tradition is formed only 
when a heroic vocation awakens as an in-esistible force from above and 
where it is animated by a will to keep on going, overcoming every mate- 
rial or rational obstacle. This, after all, is the secret of every type of con- 
queror. The great conquerors of the past have always perceived them- 
selves as children of destiny, as the bearers of a force that had to manifest 
itself and before which everything else (starting from their own selves, 
preferences, pleasures, and tranquillity) had to be sacrificed. Up here, all 
this becomes evident, immediate, natural. The silent greatness of these 
dominating peaks, reached at the risk of great dangers, suggests the si- 
lence of a universal action, an action that through a warrior race spreads 
throughout the world with the same purity, the same sense of fate, and the 
same elementary forces as the great conqueror; thus, as from a blazing 
nucleus, a brightness radiates and shines forth. 

I believe that the strength behind the miracle of the Roman Empire 



84 



Meditations on the Peaks 

was not any different from this. In the silent premeridian brightness, the 
slow and very high circumvolutions of the hawks above us evoke the sym- 
bol of the Roman legions — the eagle — in its highest and most noble repre- 
sentation. I am also reminded of the most luminous passages of Caesar's 
writings in which one finds no traces of sentimentalism, no eloquent com- 
ments, no echo of subjectivity, but rather a pure exposition of facts, plain 
language to describe things and events, and a style that is like shiny metal, 
just like the military conquests of this legendary hero of the Roman world. 
I am also reminded of the words attributed to Constantius Chlorus, words 
which greatly reveal the occult and maybe unconscious impulse of the 
Roman expansion. It is said that this military leader, gathering enigmatic 
traditions, journeyed with his legions as far as Britannia, not so much to 
perform military feats or for loot, but rather to discover the place where 
"the light never goes out" and to "contemplate the Father of the Gods," 
thus anticipating the divine condition which, according to an ancient Ro- 
man belief, awaited emperors and military leaders after their deaths. F. 
Nietzsche wrote, "Our lives and happiness lie beyond the ice, the North 
and death." 

Through the symbol and in terms of obscure forebodings, this tradition 
leads us to comprehend the latent meaning of what can be called the Ro- 
man legionary spirit. These cohorts of men of iron, impassible, capable of 
any discipline, spread through the world without a reason and not even 
with a truly preordained plan, but rather obeying a transcendent impulse. 
Through conquest and through the universal realization they achieved for 
Rome, they vaguely perceived a foreboding of that which is no longer 
human, of that aetemitas (eternity) that became directly connected with 
the ancient imperial Roman symbol. 

Such thoughts occur to me with a strange power at this time and in this 
place. And just as at night, from an elevated place, the lights scattered in 
the plains can be seen all the way to the most distant horizons, likewise 
what surfaces in my mind is the idea of a superior, incorporeal unity of the 
invisible front of all those who, despite all, fight in different parts of the 
world the same battle, lead the same revolt, and are the bearers of the 
same intangible tradition. These forces appear to be scattered and iso- 
lated in the world, and yet they are inexorably connected by a common 



85 



Expciiciiccs 

essence that is meant to preserve the absolute ideal of the imperium and 
to work for its return. This will occur after the cycle of this dark age closes, 
through an action that is both deep and not evident, in virtue of being a 
pure spiritual intensity unaffected by human restlessness, passions, lies, 
illusions, and divisions. This intensity is symbolized by the calm and irre- 
sistible power of this light that shines over icy peaks. At these heights, 
symbols become alive and deep meanings are revealed. There are al- 
ways moments (rare as they are, they still exist) in which physical and 
metaphysical elements converge and the outer adheres to the inner, form- 
ing a closed circuit: the light that momentarily comes out of it is certainly 
the light of an absolute life. 



86 



15. 



A Storm on Mount Rosa 



At the time the cable connecting Mount Cervino to the glacier of the 
^Plateau Rosa (3500 meters) was inaugurated, the conditions for those 
who really love the mountain and resent its tourist contamination were 
ideal. Since this is an area bordering with Switzerland, one could access 
the terminal station of the cable only with a special visa. Back then, the 
mundane, vacation, and pseudosportive refuge of those to whom the moun- 
tain has been made readily available as if it were a cheap elevator ride, 
did not exist. I was accompanied by a guide and that cable only helped us 
to reach a starting point and not our final destination, since our intention 
was to go across glaciers and rocks from Plateau Rosa to Mount Rosa's 
mountain group. 

This crossing is a very long one, but it is not very difficult if the weather 
is fine and as long as one knows how to orient oneself. This going along in 
the midst of a primordial nature scene acts upon one's soul as a liberation; 
here the view reveals alternately snows and black or greenish broken rocks, 
with immense areas of slabs and rocks piled up as if they were the remains 
of a primordial cataclysm. We descend for a while along a high path on the 
rim of a valley; our eyes contemplate again the welcome and unusual sight 
of green fields and trees. Then we ascend again, reach a pass where foot- 
prints and red marks on the stones indicate the direction to the mountain 
refuge Sella on Mount Rosa. I know this direction very well. Thus I am 
puzzled when all of a sudden, almost magically, the path ends; there are no 
signs, only high rocks and landslides toward the glacier below. 

It is evening already, we are at about 3000 meters and we have been 
walking since dawn. It is pointless to try to look for traces of the path. 



87 



Experiences 

Finally, we barely make out a path on the lower glacier. We descend to 
that spot, then we decide to follow the path, trusting our good luck. Soon, 
in the darkness, each next trace becomes our only reference. It is approxi- 
mately ten p.m. when we reach the shelter. There we discover the reason 
for our bewilderment. Last year huge sectors of the mountain had slid. 
During the night we spend in the refuge, which is anchored on rock, we 
are very apprehensive: it feels as if the refuge is shaking with the rock. 
The old pathway has been destroyed. 

The next morning I still want to cross the so-called Gemini (Castor 
and Pollux) one more time. These are two peaks about 4200 meters high, 
united by crests of ice. In itself this crossing is not a difficult one, although 
it may become so due to the weather and the conditions of the ice. Leav- 
ing Sella, we have to cross what could be called without exaggeration a 
"white inferno" (when the sun shines at full strength). This is a vast valley 
of snowy ice at a slight incline, surrounded by crevices, where the reflec- 
tions of the sun and the heat are often unbearable in this very thin air. 
Then, after tackling the steep side of the peaks, we reach the crest of the 
peaks. What follows is a couple of hours of icy crests, with many crevices 
to the right and left; these crests are sometimes so thin that one has to walk 
without anything to lean on, balancing oneself on the middle part with the 
void on both sides. There are some difficulties only when, due to the north- 
ern wind, sections of veiy hard ice are formed. Then we have to carve 
small steps with the ice axe, taking turns so as not to run out of energy. 
Regardless of whether one is going alone or with another person, any 
safety measure is a pure illusion. The usual method, which consists of 
stopping, digging in the ice axe as far as it will go, and running a rope 
through it so that one's companion can be safely hooked on, cannot be 
used. This cannot be done on pure ice; to be attached to a rope represents 
only a perception of safety, the truth being that if one were to fall, he 
would drag the other unfortunate person along. But usually the Gemini are 
not that horrible. The reward for the tough ascent is a truly magnificent, 
indeed glorious, panorama of a sea of alps and peaks of the Swiss canton 
of Berne. 

Our excursion does not present major difficulties. By the first hours of 
the afternoon we have already made it back to the refuge. A little later the 



88 



A Storm on Mount Rosa 

weather changes. The lines of the peaks disappear amid gusts of fog. Dur- 
ing the night the weather turns definitely nasty. However, the following 
morning a new radiant clarity shines on. In that light we see in the dis- 
tance, on the lower part of the glacier, a man moving in a zigzag, falling 
down and getting up again like a drunkard. It does not take us long to catch 
up with him. He is bloodied in various parts of his body and he looks like a 
person having hallucinations. This is what we learn. 

The previous day, two young men, two young ladies, and himself had 
attempted to cross the Gemini a few hours after us. The bad weather caught 
them on the group of peaks. Due to the lack of visibility the situation soon 
became desperate because everything depends on locating the only point 
that leads to the descent on the lower part of the glacier, on the Italian side 
of the border. They could not find that point and the five of them were 
stuck up there at 4200 meters. One can imagine what a night spent there 
must be like, with bad weather and the wind blowing from the north, with- 
out finding any shelter. These five tried to find shelter behind a piece of 
jutting slab, huddling together on a small slippery surface, with the void on 
both sides. By the early daylight one of the two girls had died (they had 
climbed in shorts!). Before the weather cleared up, the two young men 
left, desperately trying to find a way down. The third young man stayed 
behind with the second girl. As she slipped into a semiconscious state, he 
thought she was going to die. There must have been some sentimental 
connection between the two of them; the young man resolved to take his 
life and hurled himself over the precipice. However this move proved to 
be his salvation. His fall caused a small avalanche of soft snow that took 
him all the way down, almost unscathed, to the lower glacier. This was the 
man zigzagging in the snow, bleeding. The second girl up there did not 
die. She was taken to the refuge half delirious, but luckily for her she 
made it alive. As for the two men, one fell into a crevice and broke his leg, 
the other managed to get to the valley and called for help. 

On this occasion I cannot help but think how much, in these high peaks, 
everything is in the hands of fate. Two hours later, and it could have been 
us in that kind of predicament And what should I say when someone climbs 
almost vertical icy walls, where if two or three centimeters give way that 
is enough for him to fall to his death? And yet this may be one of the 

deepest aspects of the experience of mountain climbing: a kind of amor 
fati, to unite the excitement of the adventure with danger, to give in to 
trusting that which in our destiny is beyond human control. 

The recently deceased John Dewey was applauded by the American press as the most representative figure of 
American civilization. This is quite right. His theories are entirely representative of the vision of man and 
life which is the premise of Americanism and its «democracy». 

The essence of such theories is this: that everyone can become what he wants to, within the limits of the 
technological means at his disposal. Equally, a person is not what he is from his true nature and there is no 
real difference between people, only differences in qualifications. According to this theory anyone can be anyone 
he wants to be if he knows how to train himself. 

This is obviously the case with the «self-made man»; in a society which has lost all sense of tradition the 
notion of personal aggrandizement will extend into every aspect of human existence, reinforcing the egalitarian 
doctrine of pure democracy. If the basis of such ideas is accepted, then all natural diversity has to be 
abandoned. Each person can presume to possess the potential of everyone else and the terms «superior» and 
«inferior» lose their meaning; every notion of distance and respect loses meaning; all life-styles are open to 
all. To all organic conceptions of life Americans oppose a mechanistic conception. In a society which has 
«started from scratch», everything has the characteristic of being fabricated. In American society appearances 
are masks not faces. At the same time, proponents of the American way of life are hostile to personality. 

The Americans' «open-mindedness», which is sometimes cited in their favor, is the other side of their interior 
formlessness. The same goes for their «individualism». Individualism and personality are not the same: the one 
belongs to the formless world of quantity, the other to the world of quality and hierarchy. The Americans are the 
living refutation of the Cartesian axiom, «l think, therefore I am»: Americans do not think, yet they are. The 
American «mind», puerile and primitive, lacks characteristic form and is therefore open to every kind of 
standardization. 

In a superior civilization, as, for example, that of the Indo-Aryans, the being who is without a characteristic 
form or caste (in the original meaning of the word), not even that of servant or shudra, would emerge as a 
pariah. In this respect America is a society of pariahs. There is a role for pariahs. It is to be subjected to 
beings whose form and internal laws are precisely defined. Instead the modern pariahs seek to become dominant 
themselves and to exercise their dominion over all the world. 

There is a popular notion about the United States that it is a «young nation» with a «great future before it». 
Apparent American defects are then described as the «faults of youth» or 'growing pains». It is not difficult to 
see that the myth of «progress» plays a large part in this judgment. According to the idea that everything new is 
good, America has a privileged role to play among civilized nations. In the First World War the United States 
intervened in the role of «the civilized world» par excellence. The «most evolved» nation had not only a right 
but a duty to interfere in the destinies of other peoples. 

The structure of history is, however, cyclical not evolutionary. It is far from being the case that the most 
recent civilizations are necessarily «superior». They may be, in fact, senile and decadent. There is a necessary 
correspondence between the most advanced stages of a historical cycle and the most primitive. America is the 
final stage of modern Europe. Guenon called the United States «the far West», in the novel sense that the United 
States represents the reductio ad absurdum of the negative and the most senile aspects of Western civilization. 
What in Europe exist in diluted form are magnified and concentrated in the United States whereby they are 
revealed as the symptoms of disintegration and cultural and human regression. The American mentality can only be 
interpreted as an example of regression, which shows itself in the mental atrophy towards all higher interests 
and incomprehension of higher sensibility. The American mind has limited horizons, one conscribed to everything 
which is immediate and simplistic, with the inevitable consequence that everything is made banal, basic and 
leveled down until it is deprived of all spiritual life. Life itself in American terms is entirely mechanistic. 
The sense of «l» in America belongs entirely to the physical level of existence. The typical American neither has 

1 



spiritual dilemmas nor complications: he is a «natural» joiner and conformist. 

The primitive American mind can only superficially be compared to a young mind. The American mind is a feature of 
the regressive society to which I have already referred. 

American Morality 

The much-vaunted sex appeal of American women is drawn from films, reviews and pin-ups, and is in large print 
fictitious. A recent medical survey in the United States showed that 75 per cent of young American women are 
without strong sexual feeling and instead of satisfying their libido they seek pleasure narcissistically in 
exhibitionism, vanity and the cult of fitness and health in a sterile sense. American girls have «no hang-ups 
about sex»; they are «easy going» for the man who sees the whole sexual process as something in isolation thereby 
making it uninteresting and matter-of-fact, which, at such a level, it is meant to be. Thus, after she has been 
taken to the cinema or a dance, it is something like American good manners for the girl to let herself be kissed 
— this doesn't mean anything. American women are characteristically frigid and materialistic. The man who «has 
his way» with an American girl is under a material obligation to her. The woman has granted a material favor. In 
cases of divorce American law overwhelmingly favors the woman. American women will divorce readily enough when 
they see a better bargain. It is frequently the case in America that a woman will be married to one man but 
already «engaged» to a future husband, the man she plans to marry after a profitable divorce. 

«Our» American Media 

Americanization in Europe is widespread and evident. In Italy it is a phenomenon which is rapidly developing in 
these post-war years and is considered by most people, if not enthusiastically, at least as something natural. 
Some time ago I wrote that of the two great dangers confronting Europe - Americanism and Communism - the first is 
the more insidious. Communism cannot be a danger other than in the brutal and catastrophic form of a direct 
seizure of power by communists. On the other hand Americanization gains ground by a process of gradual 
infiltration, effecting modifications of mentalities and customs which seem inoffensive in themselves but which 
end in a fundamental perversion and degradation against which it is impossible to fight other than within oneself. 

It is precisely with respect to such internal opposition that most Italians seem weak. Forgetting their own 
cultural inheritance they readily turn to the United States as something akin to the parent guide of the world. 
Whoever wants to be modern has to measure himself according to the American standard. It is pitiable to witness a 
European country so debase itself. Veneration for America has nothing to do with a cultured interest in the way 
other people live. On the contrary, servility towards the United States leads one to think that there is no other 
way of life worth considering on the same level as the American one. 

Our radio service is Americanized. Without any criterion of superior and inferior it just follows the fashionable 
themes of the moment and markets what is considered «acceptable» — acceptable, that is, to the most Americanized 
section of the public, which is to say the most degenerate. The rest of us are dragged along in its wake. Even 
the style of presentation on radio has become Americanized. «Who, after listening to an American radio program, 
can suppress a shudder when he considers that the only way of escaping communism is by becoming Americanized?» 
Those are not the words of an outsider but of an American sociologist, James Burnham, professor at the University 
of Princeton. Such a judgment from an American should make Italian radio programmers blush for shame. 

The consequence of the «do your own thing» democracy is the intoxication of the greater part of the population 
which is not capable of discriminating for itself, which, when not guided by a power and an ideal, all too easily 
loses sense of its own identity. 

The Industrial Order in America 

In his classic study of capitalism Werner Sombart summarized the late capitalist phase in the adage Fiat producto, 
pareat homo. In its extreme form capitalism is a system in which a man's value is estimated solely in terms of 
the production of merchandise and the invention of the means of production. Socialist doctrines grew out of a 

2 



reaction to the lack of human consideration in this system. 

A new phase has begun in the United States where there has been an upsurge of interest in so-called labor 
relations. In appearance it would seem to signify an improvement: in reality this is a deleterious phenomenon. 
The entrepreneurs and employers have come to realize the importance of the «human factor» in a productive economy, 
and that it is a mistake to ignore the individual involved in industry: his motives, his feelings, his working 
day life. Thus, a whole school of study of human relations in industry has grown up, based on behaviorism. 
Studies like Human Relations in Industry by B. Gardner and G. Moore have supplied a minute analysis of the 
behavior of employees and their motivations with the precise aim of defining the best means to obviate all 
factors that can hinder the maximization of production. Some studies certainly don't come from the shop floor but 
from the management, abetted by specialists from various colleges. The sociological investigations go as far as 
analyzing the employee's social ambience. This kind of study has a practical purpose: the maintenance of the 
psychological contentment of the employee is as important as the physical. In cases in which a worker is tied to 
a monotonous job which doesn't demand a great deal of concentration, the studies will draw attention to the 
«danger» that his mind may tend to wander in a way that may eventually reflect badly on his attitude towards the 
job. 

The private lives of employees are not forgotten — hence the increase in so-called personnel counseling. 
Specialists are called in to dispel anxiety, psychological disturbances and non-adaptation «complexes», even to 
the point of giving advice in relation to the most personal matters. A frankly psycho-analytic technique and one 
much used is to make the subject «talk freely» and put the results obtainable by this «catharsis» into relief. 

None of this is concerned with the spiritual betterment of human beings or any real human problems, such as a 
European would understand them in this «age of economics». On the other side of the Iron Curtain man is treated 
as a beast of burden and his obedience is maintained by terror and famine. In the United States man is also seen 
as just a factor of labor and consumption, and no aspect of his interior life is neglected and every factor of 
his existence is drawn to the same end. In the «Land of the Free», through every medium, man is told he has 
reached a degree of happiness hitherto undreamed of. He forgets who he is, where he came from, and basks in the 
present. 

American «Democracy» in Industry 

There is a significant and growing discrepancy in the United States between the shibboleths of the prevailing 
political ideology and the effective economic structures of the nation. A large part of studies of the subject is 
played by the 'morphology of business». Studies corroborate the impression that American business is a long way 
from the type of organization which corresponds to the democratic ideal of U.S. propaganda. American businesses 
have a «pyramid» structure. They constitute at the top an articulate hierarchy. The big businesses are run in the 
same way as government ministries and are organized along similar lines. They have coordinating and controlling 
bodies which separate the business leaders from the mass of employees. Rather than becoming more flexible in a 
social sense the «managerial elite» (Burnham) is becoming more autocratic than ever — something not unrelated 
to American foreign policy. 

This is the end of yet another American illusion. America: the «land of opportunity», where every possibility is 
there for the person who can grasp it, a land where anyone can rise from rags to riches. At first there was the 
«open frontier» for all to ride out across. That closed and the new «open frontier» was the sky, the limitless 
potential of industry and commerce. As Gardner, Moore and many others have shown, this too is no longer limitless, 
and the opportunities are thinning out. Given the ever increasing specialization of labor in the productive 
process and the increasing emphasis on «qualifications», what used to seem obvious to Americans — that their 
children would «go further» than they would — is for many people no longer obvious at all. Thus it is that in the 
so-called political democracy of the United States, the force and the power in the land, that is to say the 
industry and the economy, are becoming ever more self-evidently undemocratic. The problem then is: should reality 
be made to fit ideology or vice-versa? Until recently the overwhelming demand has been for the former course of 
action; the cry goes out for a return to the «real America» of unfettered enterprise and the individual free of 
central government control. Nevertheless, there are also those who would prefer to limit democracy in order to 

adapt political theory to commercial reality. If the mask of American democracy were thereby removed, it would 
become clear to what extent democracy in America (and elsewhere) is only the instrument of an oligarchy which 
pursues a method of «indirect action», assuring the possibility of abuse and deception on a large scale of those 
many who accept a hierarchical system because they think it is justly such. This dilemma of «democracy» in the 
United States may one day give place to some interesting developments. 